---
title: Does Social Media Contribute to Depression Among the Youth of the 21st Century?
date: 2021-3-20
cover: 'youth-depression.jpg'
category: 'Q & A'
tags:
  - Youth
  - Society
---

To question the obvious is the hardest form of questioning because it entails entertaining doubt on the very ground upon which we stand, and initiating a volcanic activity that may disrupt the over-arching order that binds us together. It takes great courage to question the obvious and even greater stamina to accommodate the possibility that the present reality is weaved on a thread of lies and half-truths. The fear lies not on the exercise of examining the present order but on the uncertainty of how to deal with the ensuing chaos. Hence, more often than not, most people, entire nations and humanity in general will be very comfortable building their lives on fiction and sailing through the ocean of worldly existence in a state of deep slumber.

This gives them comfort, peace and tranquility. And so I have to throw a word of caution for those following this series of entries, that Philosophy is not designed to bring one peace of mind. Quite the contrary, for the one who persists in questioning, will sooner or later discover the strangeness of his existence. He/she will find the world a strange place to live in. This strangeness will bring about a sense of alienation and this alienation may even bring about depression.
The subject of our present discussion will take us into a deep analysis of this phenomenon or condition called depression, though looked at from a different perspective. We will endeavor to demystify depression, not only because the question demands that we do, but also because readers engaged in the enterprise of philosophy will have to deal with depression in one way or the other. To be a true philosopher, one will have to be comfortable with alienation from society. This means, one will also have to deal with depression and find a way rising above it. And so while I encourage a life of philosophy, I feel obliged to provide a guideline on how to embrace that kind of life. And in subsequent entries, we will go through the various ways one can train their mental faculties in order to give them a stable constitution and robust orientation, qualities which will be quite necessary for the would-be philosopher to weather the inevitable storms that will confront anyone determined to question society.

The present question sketches the roadmap that we will use in order to navigate the unfathomable maze of social life in an age of virtual communities and how this may have an impact on the mental health of the subject. And so, I will first proceed with a brief outline of the short exposition that will follow. Our starting point will be a discussion into the nature of depression; how it comes about; how it affects the subject of such condition; the various ways that increase it; and more importantly, how it can be handled or transcended. In discussing depression, it will become necessary to lay down certain principles in psychology or the science of the mind and it is at this point I must mention the first disclaimer. My research and understanding of the human mind and the mind in general may depart a great deal from established canon in the field of psychology.

And while this is not the most appropriate platform to lay down the scientific formulation of my analysis of the mind, I still have to mention principles which will not have received the requisite attention for their establishment in order to further the plot of our present discussion. This, for a philosopher is a great error since I will make a great presupposition thus putting a curious reader who doesn’t have access to my research in a disadvantaged position. For those who will be interested in the foundational methodologies that conceived the principles I will call to aid, I encourage you reach out through the addresses provided at the end of the article and we shall engage further.
The second stage will be an analysis of social life in general and in particular through the lenses of human nature and the aspect of human nature that makes social life function in the way we have observed it to function. As a second disclaimer, I must mention that I will assume our consensus on the aspect of human nature that will feature in our subsequent discussion, without taking the laborious effort to methodically reveal and substantiate the claims on the mentioned human nature. Neither the space nor the level of discourse of this entry permits us to journey through such extensive lengths.

Having established the foundations of our premises thusly, we can then examine the structure of a social media architecture and be able to point out exactly the aspect that may or may not contribute to depression, and more importantly, the mechanism at play that actually create the depression.
Finally, we will render our findings in the context necessitated by the question, which is the youth of the 21st century. Since the context provides a boundary, a third disclaimer is in order. By youth, we will restrict our focus to the millenials, not because that’s what the reference necessarily is, but because such a limited focus will better assist in driving the point home. At the tail end of our analysis, we will come back to the question and see whether the answer is a yes or otherwise. With that lengthy introduction as our map, let’s dive into the murky waters of depression and social media.

To understand what depression is, allow me to describe the process that informs the development of the human mind particularly as regards matters behavior and personality. The process through which the mind “learns” will hereafter be called “ego scripting” with ego here referring to the mental DNA that defines one’s personality. While I am aware the term ‘ego’ has other connotations in psychology and psychoanalysis, I employ it here specifically to refer to the specific syllabus of an individual’s mind. Or to use another reference, the specific program that runs the mental faculties. An ego script is a line program that sets the sequence of expectation or structures the way an individual ‘learns’ to do something. In this regard, there are many types of ego, as there are many things to learn and many ways by which to learn them. It’s not my wish to traverse all the different types of egos and the mechanism under which they operate. The point to note is that, once a particular ego has been scripted, it lays down a specific pattern of behavior. Such behavior is always a response to an environmental stimulus. To recap, the mind learns through generating responses to environmental stimuli. These responses create or script a program so as to automate behavior. And different behavioral traits that have been repeated overtime create a unified system we may call personality.

Since everything is structured based on environment, all learning can be said to be influenced by the specific environment of the learner. ‘Environment’ is here broadly defined to mean the entirety of the human surrounding; everything perceived to be outside of the human body and thus objectified. Learning too is here broadly defined as the entirety of the process via which a person forms an understanding of their surroundings and establishes a relationship with the various elements that structure that environment. The programs are thus designed to explain and interact with a specific set of environment and they work optimally when the structure of this environment remains more or less constant. In the event of minor fluctuations, the program usually rewrites itself to adjust to the changing environment.

However, in the event of a sharp gradient of the change, that is, when the environment changes at a faster rate than the capacity of the mind to readjust, a conflict is created which is commonly referred to as “stress” and when this stress persists it creates a prolonged state of tension we will call depression. The difference between stress and depression is one of degree. In a state of stress, the program tries to readjust conditions to go back to the original optimal state. But in a state of depression, the repeated attempts to readjust and the failure to do so, itself produces a new pattern of its own and instead or going back to the original settings, the mind begins accepting the new pattern as a new program.

It should be remembered that ego scripting is a product of repetition, and so repetition met with constant failure leads to the creation of a new ego script observed in the person in question as a state of depression. Depression is the condition of creating a new ego script through a repeated failure to snap back to the original state. It only gets problematic when it is an isolated case. However, if the process was uniform across a given set of population, it wouldn’t be viewed as mental illness. The tragic element is that since society or the immediate nurturing environment alienates this new behavior, it becomes extremely difficult for the new program to be useful.

To put it in simple language, when the expectation (the ego script or program) clash with reality (the changing environment), it creates a state of tension called ‘stress’. Stress thus created, the program works to restore ‘factory settings’ or the original optimal conditions. When it fails, it repeats again and again but when the failure persists, the ensuing process creates a pattern manifested in a state of depression. That is why someone who is seriously depressed acquires a totally new form and personality, or at the very least, manifests behavior completely alien to ‘normal’ behavior. Once a thorough understanding of depression is attained, it becomes easy to design therapeutic regimens with which to help the victim overcome the condition or normalize it by transcending the limitations of depression.

Having analyzed what depression is and how it is caused, the next station is looking at the social nature of human beings. Without concerning with too much detail, human beings are generally considered as a gregarious species, and indeed the very structure of society mirrors this nature. It is not our concern whether this nature is real or not; that will be taken as a given. Our interest lies in the consequence of this nature in human behavior. We live in societies for maximum cooperation, which guarantees our survival and our ability to rise to the level of mastering our environment and become the dominant species in the food chain. The need for gaining acceptance in society is therefore not only a survival need, but one that is fundamentally backed in our DNA throughout our evolutionary journey.
From a tender age, humans are dependent on their betters for nourishment and support. And we learn at that early age, through the process already outlined above, that being accepted and portraying accepted behavior is indeed a survival prerequisite.

Throughout our growth and development, the ego scripting process guides us in the ways of living according to the established norms and attaining to the highest level of perfection. In a physical society, the structures of accepted behavior are very clearly laid out. The ‘laws’ are well codified and the indoctrination process is very rigorous. Further, and this is the most crucial point, there exist a final authority in the structures already established, that acts as the custodian of the ‘laws’ and the paragon of justice and norm. The existence of this authority in a physical society or community ensures that there exists a scale against which humans can measure themselves as regards their perfection level. At any given point, there is a system in place to measure progress and punish transgression. To illustrate this point with say a religious community, there exist structures for dictating the details of ‘correct’ behavior; the laws are well codified and documented; the indoctrination process is very rigid; and the knowledge regarding the punishment for miscreants and transgressors is made very available and agonizingly detailed.

Therefore the process of gaining approval is properly laid out. And the authority to ensure the order is established is well known and much revered within the circles of the community. That humans will go to extreme lengths to ensure this order is maintained and they are on the right side of it, needs no further illustration. This is a survival necessity.
The problem, or at least what will reveal itself as such in the context of our discussion, occurs when we start considering a virtual community. For in a virtual community, no such order exists; no such authority exists. And yet, social media in general is constructed solely on this survival principle. Everybody seeks approval from society in one form or another. It occurs to this author that even those who will often say things like “I don’t care what others say or think”, happen to be the most vulnerable of the lot as regards the need for approval.

They care so much that they feel compelled to make a public declaration to announce their position. They want those others, whom they claim not to care what they think, to think of them in a certain angle or see them through a certain lens. Of course, there are those who truly think they don’t care, but unconsciously, they care enough to dictate how others should perceive them; as not caring. In short, everybody cares, some more than others, in different ways and fashions and through different manifestations and demonstrations. But at the core, we all care how we are perceived by others; our nurturing process made sure of that much. If humans could just hatch like snakes fully aware of how to get food and survive, maybe the story would have been different. But as it happens, such is not the case. For many years during development, the child is completely dependent on the adults for food and all sustenance and help. And even in adult life, society is structured in such a manner that we must still cooperate with others for survival. Such is the mechanism that creates the need for social approval. It is thus in poor taste to look down on those who openly manifest the thirst for approval and public validation by using such derogatory terms as ‘low self-esteem’ to describe the cause of their behavior. But I digress.

In virtual community like the community we interact with through social media, the lack of a social standard or final authority makes this enterprise of seeking approval very problematic. A virtual community lacks the structure for granting this approval. And it is in response to this that people settle for the next best thing, the popular approval. In social media therefore, what counts is being on the side of the ‘popular vote’.

Depression, in the context described above can thus be seen as resulting at two levels. On the first and general, as the ego scripting is designed to seek social approval, a tension will occasion when there lacks an authority or a structured system to grant this approval. Our interactions in social media can sometimes be seen as lacking in meaning precisely because of this. We endeavor to seek social approval and so naturally there will be a tension when this approval is not forthcoming. And this tension, in the sequence already outlined, may grow to become depression. Yes, social media connects people. But what makes this connection possible, is the desire for approval. But when everyone goes to a social media platform to seek approval, a question may be asked as to who is actually supposed to be giving this approval. Everyone, apparently, is there to receive. And so it is that the lack of a standard authority who gives approval in a virtual community, can be understood as part of the reason why engaging in a virtual platform may bring about depression.

The second level of this depression through the use of social media concerns the popular opinion which is constantly shifting. When one decides to always be on the ‘right’ side of the popular opinion, more often than not, the popular opinion shifts to the domain that conflicts with already established programs of the ego. And this creates a tension, the prolonging of which may lead to depression.

But the third level, and most important in our analysis since it concerns the youths of the 21st century, will occupy our attention as we come close to winding up this discussion. For those born in the 90’s and prior before the internet was widespread in use and especially before the era of social media, they were indoctrinated on how to survive, by seeking approval in a physical community. However, it later became apparent that the most prevalent community for social networking and engagement is the virtual one. And so we end up with a generation that was taught to survive in ways that have already become redundant through being overtaken by events. The growth and penetration of social media has made the role of physical community less outlined. However, social media lacks a template for filling the void of social approval and indeed, it is architecturally not enabled to facilitate it. And this structural deficiency can bring about depression.

In sum, the direct answer to our question is a ‘yes’ but it is a ‘yes’ we can only understand when we arrive at it through a process of guided analysis as I hope I have endeavored to attempt. Understanding the nature of depression takes us a step closer to coming up with ways of dealing with it. The limited space of this entry prevents me from going into the clinical and therapeutic ways of addressing depression but should the occasion permit, it will be my pleasure to handle the issue in a deeper method in the near future. This concerns the mental health of an entire generation and society in general, and so it warrants the maximum attention of all thinkers and practitioners in this space.

It is my sincere hope that this entry, though deficient in technical details and lacking in the rigorous academic method of analysis will still be helpful towards the attainment of a general understanding on the phenomena addressed and that it will stimulate further research and exposition on the state of our mental health in the 21st century, when social media and all its accompaniments permeates every instance of our existence. Otherwise the collective madness will swallow our consciousness and reduce us to mere automatons in a world of machines. But such a grim eventuality will be averted when you, dear reader and I are involved in the exercise of questioning everything. Philosophy is the only antidote to social madness.

Thank you for your time. Until next time, I am,
Yours Truly,
Grand Philosopher.

You can send your queries to the Grand Philosopher through the emails [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info) or [info@hyreads.com](mailto:info@hyreads.com).<br>

To engage is to educate; to educate is to enlighten; to enlighten is to empower. Let’s engage for a better world and Just Society. You can also get in touch via twitter **[@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)**
