---
title: How Can Corruption In Kenya Be Contained? Part 1
date: 2021-3-21
cover: 'Corruption.jpg'
category: 'Q & A'
tags:
  - Society
  - Governance
  - Leadership
---

What is the role of philosophy in the modern society? There’s no objective way of answering this question, because to begin with, there’s no consensus on what philosophy really is. In my experience, and in my interactions with my students, I have always preferred the path of self-definition of philosophy. It matters little what the ancient Greeks defined philosophy or the role it played in the structuring of their society. The crucial point that bears relevance is what philosophy means to our society and what role it ought to occupy in the affairs and structures of our world. Whatever else we may take philosophy to be, it can hardly be denied that at the core, it involves a methodical inquiry and critical examination of the surrounding environment and all phenomena contained thereabout. And if we are to be true to this exercise of questioning, I believe we must first start with the questioning of what philosophy is and the function it should play in our society.

Therefore, it pains me greatly when I see those who claim to be practitioners of philosophy being overly engaged in the memorization of archaic texts, the idolization of past doctrines and the canonization of ancient philosophers. Not that there’s anything wrong with that per se’ but it robs one the freedom of thinking and reconceptualization of reality. It neuters one’s creative powers and turns a human being into an encyclopedia. I will be blunt on this point. In this age of the internet where we can store all information in machines and make reference to it at a simple click of a button, with what justification do we still make young creative minds to memorize information that they can easily access anytime the need arises? And at what cost exactly? Every age occasions unique problems which demand unique approaches and a fresh perspective in order to construct solutions. But the beginning of this exercise is the questioning of these problems. We have Google to store all information. We need philosophers who are freed from the compulsive indoctrination of past canon and are able to concern themselves with problems that affect our modern world. We need philosophy that has actual value in real life. We need philosophy that is attached to the world of the 21st century. We need philosophy that is useful to our day-to-day existence.

It is in this in mind that I engage in this enterprise of responding to questions that seek to bring about an understanding to social issues; Issues that actually affect daily life; And issues the addressing of which becomes problematic because the people who are supposed to assist in said addressing are busy memorizing Latin phrases and Greek etymologies. Such is the issue that confronts us in our present question. Corruption has become such a common vocabulary in our modern discourse and in particular as regards matters governance and the management of public affairs, and yet sound and solid philosophical literature that seeks to demystify it so as to reveal its nature is very scant if at all. This leaves public officials in a blind spot, hence all the talk of fighting corruption and all the natural consequences that inevitably follow when humanity is engaged in fighting something it don’t even understand. It’s not even possible to get a simple serviceable definition of corruption. So what informs the decision to fight it? And how exactly to do you fight corruption? How do you know if you are fighting or just entertaining illusions of fighting and whether or not you are winning in this fight?

In a previous entry, I emphasized the need for philosophy to question the obvious. Corruption passes as such an obvious phenomenon, one that grows by the day and its impacts compound geometrically. The implications are far-reaching, as anything said in the direction of a solution to the ‘menace’ of corruption will go a long way to influence the structure of policies and the orientation of society in general. But due to the scant nature of the available literature on the subject, and the misguided tangents these literatures tend to take, I will be sensitive to the fact that we need to adopt an approach that both lays down the foundational theses and also advances technical suggestions in the way of addressing corruption. In respect to the delicate balance to be maintained, we will adopt a simple language and lay down our principles in a slow manner, so that the foundational theses can get enough time to germinate in the imagination of the reader, for this will open the reader’s mind to accept the alignment of our conclusion. Without further ado, let’s first dissect our query.

There is a presupposition we need to get out of the way before we gain clarity on the nature of the question. The question assumes that corruption, whatever it is, is something detestable, and so needs, at the very least some form of containment measures. The one who asked the question is my student and so we have engaged on the subject before, hence the presupposition backed into the question. But for the general reader, it’s only fair to go back to the examination of the nature of corruption, so that we can collectively arrive at the supposition that corruption, its nature thus revealed, is a phenomenon of a character deemed detestable and thus warrants out attention as regards addressing it. We should also arrive at the supposition that the appropriate way of dealing with corruption is through containment.

And so our first task will be the revelation, through thorough exposition, of the nature of corruption. What, in essence, is the nature of corruption; how do we know this to be true and how do we substantiate the claim thus made? In discussing the nature of corruption, we will discuss certain aspects of human nature and the nature of society and the interaction between man and his environment and the principles that govern this relationship and interaction. This will give us the grounding context. It is important to demonstrate how various elements come together to produce an output we call corruption and how the possible realignment of these elements may actually produce a completely different phenomenon. It is only after laying down these foundational principles that we can hazard a definition of corruption. And so, I must seek the reader’s indulgence in this regard. The first step in any exposition is the definition of the subject in question. But our subject, being the impenetrable maze it is, due to its continued over-misuse, it is imperative to set the ground firmly before we can piece together a definition.

The next step will be the informed suggestions of possible containment measures, once the approach of containment as the most appropriate, has been sufficiently justified. The list of containment measures will in no way be exhaustive but only enough to ignite further debate and shape the nature of discourse on this subject. What’s more, the suggestions are only to be read and appreciated in the limited context of this essay and should not be taken as a general antidote. They should only be employed and examined following the understanding on corruption that will be laid down in the paragraphs to follow.
Next in line will be a brief description of the Kenyan context and how that context fits the bill of corruption thus defined and described. The language here will be of a general nature and examples and illustrations cited will be those taken as givens; those that permeate the collective imagination and hence those which do not require intense academic analysis for their establishment as social facts.

The final stage will be an attempt to fit the diagnosis of containment measures in the mosaic of the Kenyan context, in order to get us to the point of actually responding justifiably to our present question, i.e., how can corruption in Kenya be contained. The question is contextual and therefore we will try to adopt an approach that gets us to the point of answering it accordingly. What follows is designed for consumption by the general public, and so, a strong academic language and unnecessary jargon that would otherwise feature in a literature of this nature, will be avoided here. With that stretchy introduction out of the way, it is my pleasure to invite you esteemed reader into an analysis on the nature of corruption.

To understand corruption, we must first understand the architecture of human nature in the context of the interaction with the surrounding environment and other humans. For brevity sake, we will limit this interaction to survival needs or those activities engaged in with survival as the primary object. Nobody consciously chooses to be born, and by extension no living creature or entity directly selects the means via which it comes to existence. But when this existence, orchestrated and effected by the decisions and actions of other species, the offspring immediately seeks to sustain its survival and all actions undertaken and dispositions acquired are meant to better advance the chances of this survival. While it will not be possible for reasons already cited to satisfactorily justify the claim on what the primary existential drive is – that will require another essay of its own – let it suffice to assume that self-preservation either tops or makes a good contender for the top position as regards the predominant drive for survival.

Our biological anatomy and the structure of mental dispositions are all designed to increase our chances for survival. As to why this is so is still a matter of speculations and speculations abound. Why is it that despite the fact that we did not choose to be born, the thing we desire the most is the extension of life? Despite the fact that this life can sometimes get very difficult and painful, we still on average cling to it with fanatical zeal? Why did evolution bake our survival instincts in the manner and fashion it did? Why is it that, even despite many religions prominently those of the Abrahamic stock, believing in a life after death, and despite the rich coloration of that life as being better in essence and quality than this worldly life as described in the religious texts, even the most ardent practitioners of these religions will not willingly give up their worldly existence for the attainment of that hereafter? They will still eat, drink, pursue a career and go through immeasurable pain and suffering in a bid to not only increase their chances for survival but render that survival in flavored shades.

While we cannot hope to provide answers to all these questions in the limited space of our present essay and the level of discourse this essay is structured upon, I only raise them in order to stress the drive of self-preservation. The drive for self-preservation is one that is shared by all species.

But for present purposes, there’s one aspect of this drive for self-preservation that warrants our attention. When all species, and in this case human beings are out to advance their own individual chances of survival, there’s bound to be conflict among them especially when resources, here taken to be the natural endowments that facilitate this survival, are perceived to be limited in quantity, quality and distribution. And in dealing with this situation of deficiency of resources, humans have grown to be competitive against each other. To better facilitate this competition, human nature is constituted in such a manner that one prefers the accumulation or utilization of resources to oneself, sometimes even at the direct expense of his fellow humans. This phenomenon has been variously described but the most common name given to it is ‘greed’ and different traditions have taught us to perceive it in different ways. However, most traditions view greed with immoral overtones and attribute it as the foundation of all human problems. And since it will feature widely in our discussion of corruption, it is important we gain an objective understanding and appreciation on its real nature.

Follow the second part ie _How Can Corruption In Kenya Be Contained? Part 2_ using the article suggestions below this one.

Yours Truly
Grand Philosopher.

You can send your queries to the Grand Philosopher through the emails [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info) or [info@hyreads.com](mailto:info@hyreads.com).<br>

To engage is to educate; to educate is to enlighten; to enlighten is to empower. Let’s engage for a better world and Just Society. You can also get in touch via twitter **[@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)**
