---
title: In Search Of An African Identity
date: 2021-3-19
cover: 'African-identity.jpg'
category: 'Africanacity'
tags:
  - African
  - Society
---

Human history can be viewed as an alternating series of epoch and eclipses, which epochs representing times of relative stability during which times, maintenance roles are prevalent, and eclipses representing periods of intense chaos and social change brought about by a prevalence of creative roles.

It is during these periods of change, or historical eclipses, to use the term, that humanity has recorded the greatest leaps of changes and revolutions, witnessed by reforms or outright overhaul of social and political institutions. To give an example of the previous century, as it is very fresh in our memories and collective consciousness, the 20th century kicked off with a wave of radical changes which ended up defining the rest the century, the echoes of which are still apparent to this day. In 1911 the Qing Dynasty fell, bringing an end to over 3000 years of Imperial rule. The modern state of China was built on the ashes of the revolutions that followed this fall. The final decades of the Qing rule were a culmination of a century characterized by a weakening of the Chinese empire, epitomized by China’s involvement in the Opium Wars and the subsequent defeat thereof. It was a century that has since been immortalized in the Chinese consciousness as the ‘Century of Humiliation’. The change was needed and needed fast.

Europe too kicked the 20th-century spoiling for change. Though it is hard to pinpoint with any measure of accuracy, a case may be made of the year 1871 with the formation of the German Empire, an event that tipped the balance of power in Europe, setting in motion a series of events tending towards ‘restoring the balance’. This, of course, culminated with the Great War of 1914 – 1918, which was followed by an even greater war two decades later. It may be argued that this eclipse began much earlier, with the Revolutions of 1848. Whatever the case may be, it was clear, from the ashes of the two World Wars that the age of empire in Europe was over. Similar patterns can be seen in the histories of the Americas, Russia, India, and the Middle East. Suffice it to say that it makes historiographical sense to view history as an alternating sequence of epochs and eclipses, each giving birth to the next, each feeding on the remains of the previous.

It is against this backdrop that I invite us to look at the history of Africa and try to detect such patterns. Even more importantly, to probe whether we are living through an eclipse or an epoch, and even inquire on what we must do moving forward. While it is admittedly difficult to detect uniform patterns in Africa, it is still possible to piece together the fragmented history of Africa into a collective story. Before the Berlin conference of 1884 – 1885, the history of Africa is as fragmented as it gets. The Nile Valley civilizations had no contact or impact with West Africa; the Muslim conquests of North Africa had very little bearing on the Khoisan of southern Africa; the Arab slave trade along the Indian ocean had little correlation with the Moorish invasion of the Iberian Peninsula; the lucrative Trans-Saharan trade existed independent of the southern kingdoms of Mutapa and Great Zimbabwe. And so it was that these multiple fragments evolved independently taking different trajectories and each adopting different formations and orientations in terms of social structures and political institutions.

But the events of the latter part of the 19th century were to change all that, and as an unintended consequence bring about an African consciousness. The carving up of the continent amongst European powers galvanized the continent in one alignment, and as a result, produced a movement borne out of the collective suffering of the black man; Pan-Africanism. Though started with our brothers in the diaspora as a rallying call to give the black man his dignity and humanity, the movement soon took root in the continent as a response to the cries of an end to the colonial rule, which had stripped the continent bare of her resources, turned Africans into a life of servitude in their own land, and subjected them to unmentionable acts of brutality, all in the name of civilizing the Black man. Though the struggle was at great cost, both human and otherwise, the African consciousness was born.

It warrants our attention to dwell a little more on the idea of the African consciousness and even more importantly on the circumstances under which this consciousness was formed, because I believe it has a huge bearing on the shape and form subsequent African states took. The African consciousness emerged from desperate straits as an antithesis to white domination and European imperialism. It was molded as a collective voice of resistance against the unending injustices meted on Africans. The very soul of the African consciousness feeds on the fodder of European oppression, both real and imagined. It survives on the claim that Africans are the oppressed and the white man the oppressor. Its mandate was built on the function of acknowledging the white man as the enemy and treating him thusly.

Before proceeding in my debunking of the African consciousness, permit me to contrast it with the African Identify. It is hard for me to describe what the African identity really is, for the simple reason that I don’t know what it is, and very scant academic discourses even attempt to discuss the subject. It can, therefore, be argued that the African Identity is non-existent, at least at this stage in our evolution. An identity is borne out of common values and shared believes, and built on shared pillars of social, political and economic institutions. This entails, at the very least, a common history, language, culture, and religion. And for reasons already addressed above, Africa lacks a common history, language, culture and religion, and hence lacks a common identity.

And so it is, that for reasons completely beyond our control, we have an African consciousness but lack an African identity, and this dichotomy lies at the very the heart of the problems that currently bedevil the continent. We are united in our opposition to the West, but as we lack a common identity to stand upon, we find that we can’t exist without identification to the western civilization. As though to lend credibility to this thesis, you will find, upon very basic investigation, that this phenomenon is more pronounced in sub-Saharan Africa, the part of Africa that had the most historical fragments, as compared to the north. Therefore, from here on allow me the latitude of focusing on sub-Saharan Africa, when I speak of African states, to make my point.

The consequences are as profound as they are evident. At the dawn of the independence movement, this dichotomy was more consequent than ever before or ever since. Pan Africanism, an African consciousness, can largely be credited for the independence movement but for reasons that should be apparent by now, it could not help with the task of actually savoring this independence and mold the shape of the newly created African states. The former colonial states thus had to adopt the shape of their colonial masters, the very masters whose oppression they had fought so passionately. The only escape from this came in the shape of the Cold War, which offered some respite from the unthinkable reality of having to adopt the very shape and institutions of the centers of European imperialism.

And so it was that the philosophies of African socialism were molded after the philosophies of the Soviet Union. This perceived utopian world however, came crashing down when the cold war ended in the early 1990s. The states had to redefine themselves, catalyzed by the movements for multiparty democracy. Most governments which now lacked the advantage of exploiting the loot of the Cold War, caved, not from outside pressure, but from the weight of their own institutional burdens. It is safe to say, all things considered, democracy has proved to be tremendously disastrous in Africa, and it is the object of this article to attempt to demonstrate why this has been so, without going into deep academic analysis.

Without an African identity, it is difficult, if not impossible to answer the question of ‘who are we?’ let alone develop enough intellectual bandwidth to design structures and institutions that can actually serve our interest. It is unfathomable to conceive of notions of freedom when we lack the bearing to understand our position in the food chain. It is indeed absurdly rich of us to contemplate on matters of governance and politics when we lack systemic frameworks to plot our existential paradigm on the great chart of human evolution. This is the tragedy we face; the lack of a lack of identity. This tragic fate has condemned us to a life of perpetual suffering, complaining and blaming, since we lack the power to do anything else. We have made it a cultural norm to lay all the blame on our political leaders since we lack the will to act on our own initiative. And while a considerable portion of our political class is no doubt a distasteful lot, which deserves an entire circle of hell, no amount of spite should blind us as to what the real problem is; a problem that both predates them and is beyond their comprehension, let alone control. Staring down this meandering road of tragedy and wretchedness, one sees only doom and despondency. Except, on this road overgrown with bushes of thorns, there are still roses we can pick. There is, if one examines closely with clinical precision, a glimmer of hope. And this glimmer of hope is to be found the rubble of the eclipse we have just stepped into.

The upshot of an eclipse is that every nation is dedicated to the business of saving their own houses from the collapse that they don’t focus on anyone else. For the first time in many years, every nation, big or small, rich or poor, developed or otherwise, is facing the same challenge albeit at different degrees of severity. And this gives us a unique opportunity, the only opportunity of its nature, I dare say, in the foreseeable future. The opportunity to rebuild the leaking roof, if not to start the foundation altogether. The opportunity to go back to the drawing board, to recalibrate our course and tailor our destiny. The opportunity to formulate our philosophies and expand our intellectual bandwidth. The opportunity to cultivate our identity and assert our dominance. The opportunity to get a seat at the high table and command the respect we deserve. The opportunity to reclaim our dignity and celebrate our humanity. For we have a right to be here, and a solemn duty to protect our freedom and liberty.

It is thus out of a sense of duty that I light the torch of revolution, and draw my mandate to start the journey in search of the African Identity. I draw from the same spring drawn upon by our forefathers and ancestors, as they battled against overwhelming odds and boldly confronted slavery, rape and torture, as they courageously stood against exploitation and colonialism, as they proudly overcame discrimination and as they eloquently proclaimed the black man is neither a lesser nor superior man, but an equal with the right to be human and live in dignity. Let’s drink and journey together, in search of the African identity.

_~ Notes of The Grand philosopher_

**Email: [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info)**

**Twitter: [@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)\***
