---
title: 'BBI Part 3: Losing the moment'
date: 2021-3-14
cover: 'BBI.png'
category: 'Politics'
tags:
  - BBI
  - Politics
  - Society
---

That we lost the moment of nationhood occasioned by the “Handshake” is not in question. That in deed we have lost many such moments in the past throughout our long and winding history is also not up to much debate. Compounded with the fact that we lack a robust national discourse to address these concerns, warrants a strong inquiry into the very architecture of this project called “Kenya”. But before we dig into that, a little context is in order. As I am writing this essay, I can distinctly hear, from the adjacent room, a conversation between a senior party official of the ruling party and a former leader of the same ruling party in the House, arguing about the politics of the day, in a tone that leaves no one in doubt that there is no love lost between them.

Earlier, I heard the President daring his deputy to resign and the said deputy rebutting he was there to stay. “hustler nation” is now very much a thing, as well it should, and it laments on the social inequalities prevalent in our society. Members of county assemblies are making superfluous demands, which would be amusing were they not terribly painful to consider, in order to pass the BBI Bill and it can only be expected that Members of Parliament will make even more ridiculous demands, all at the crushing cost of the general citizenry. There’s also something about a sky-rocketing debt. Unemployment still forms the same sad chorus as ever. And I can’t help but make out the soul-crushing rhythm of history reverberating across our lands; the very same ravaging rhythms that have always heralded the collapse of societies. I hear nothing of the questions of national identity. I hear nothing about our collective destiny. I hear nothing about conceiving a nation. All I hear is a deafening noise from the drums of the ongoing contest of supremacy. All I hear are the cheerleaders cheering as we tear the nation. This doesn’t point to a nation pulling together. In fact, it doesn’t describe a nation at all, but a group of people unable to agree on the appropriate formula with which to share the resources abounding within the borders of this land we just so happen to inhabit. And all this at the backdrop of a debate about a document tailored to do just that; create a nation. Clearly we missed the moment. Big time!

During the momentous event of 9th of March, which will remain our reference point throughout this essay, the two statesmen highlighted nine issues, which in subsequent entries we will explore in turn, which it was supposed would provide the answer of why, after over five decades, we were still not a nation. To remain true to the source material, throughout the course of this and the subsequent essays on this subject, I will restrict myself to the exposition of the nine issues in an effort to reveal the essence of each issue through the aid of rigorous philosophical methods. Having revealed their essences thus, I will endeavor to render them in their appropriate context to enable the creation of models for their addressing. I concede, though with much pity, that we already lost this moment. But I remain hopeful that we can still reclaim it. Or, at the very least, another moment will come, and it will find us ready. But for present purposes, let’s spare no effort in coming to grips with why we lost the moment this time. When the occasion permits, we should turn our kaleidoscope into the past and see why we lost such moments when they came.

Before digging into the reasons why we lost the moment, a crucial point warrants special mention at this point. Prior to the coming of the colonialists, Kenya as a political entity did not exist. It did not exist as any entity at all for that matter. Granted, the tribes existed in their own formations, sometimes trading with each other; at other times raiding each other for livestock and God knows what else. Each tribe had its own social institutions and customs and hierarchies of leadership. But there was not, and neither had there been any framework to provide tangents for an integrated single State mirroring the present State of Kenya. There had not existed any cultural markers that could encompass the over forty tribes into a single entity. The tribes did not share a common language, did not share a common religion, and did not share a common history. There had not been any widespread conquests by a warring warrior-prince to try and subjugate the tribes and forge a united State, at least not that we know of. Such ambitions don’t seem to have simmered outside tribal lands and boundaries. As such, there was not any precedent for nation-building. While the coastal strip tells a different story and indeed was under the governance of the Sultanate of Zanzibar, those waves of a Swahili nation only swept the shore and ebbed before they could make it to the interior.

Why is this important? The story of a Kenyan nation has at its core a nagging colonial thread through whose haphazard weaving, out came an entity called Kenya, whose identity it’s our task to unravel, and if it comes down to it, create.
And so it came to be, through the seven decades of European colonization, a nation was forged, not out of a shared identity but as an expedient entity to facilitate the proper and optimal exploitation of the colony. The common language was the language of exploitation that united all the native tribes in the back-breaking slaving in plantations and mines and factories to enrich the colonizers. The common religion was the absolute worship of anything white and denigration of anything black; a religion of alienation. The common history was to be the collective suffering at the hands of the colonizer.

And so it was that exploitation, alienation and collective suffering formed the underlying ideology of the colonial State, a State which we inherited intact and incorporated its institutions wholesale when we attained political independence. As days turned into years and years into decades, it became increasingly difficult to alter or even tinker with this ideology. Rather, we became more preoccupied with the task of “development”. Partly because it was so much easier to “develop” than to re-conceive the nation, partly because we did not know how to go about the task of re-conceiving the nation, and partly because the very class of elites who would be expected to lead in this task became primary beneficiaries of the material goodies the colonial State could offer and thus got trapped by the sweetness of the loot, we have perpetuated the very same founding ideology of exploitation, alienation and suffering to the present day. And alive to that reality, it is no wonder we are constantly pulling apart rather pulling together. Because deep down, we all know too well that Kenya belongs to the powerful, just as it did in the colonial days. We recognize the fact that the only God worth our worship is a foreign God; only foreign institutions warrant our reverence; only foreign ideas command our respect; we worship now, as we worshiped then, a foreign ideal. We have learnt to alienate ourselves. We have remained true to the founding ideology.

A sincere effort at re-thinking our nationhood must thus first start with a sober analysis of the uncomfortable truths whispered above. That every time we have tried to conceive a nation we have been stymied, calls into question a critical examination at how we have been going about the exercise. And what better way that to start than with the most recent attempt. An attempt which, some would have us believe is still ongoing. An attempt which, some are hopeful will deliver us a utopia; an attempt which has so far caused as many casualties as it sought to save; an attempt whose echoes reverberate all across the country. An attempt the examination of which we now delve into.

### WHY WE LOST THE MOMENT

I will address this question from three fronts or lenses, taking each in turn. The three are: **_Essence_**, **_Platform_** and **_Method_**. The first will probe into what the essence of a moment of nationhood is and more importantly what it’s not. Given the reception the events of 9th of March received, and the ripples they have caused, a question can be raised on whether we understand the essence of such a moment. Without a full appreciation of its significance, it’s not hard to see why we could have missed it. The second covers the appropriate platform with which to advance the agenda that surrounds the moment of nationhood. As pointed out earlier, the significance lies not in the moment itself but in the events leading up to it and even more crucially, the chain of events following and the course such a chain will adopt; To adopt the right platform upon which to anchor the agenda is a paramount matter; a platform that can sustain the weight of the matters at hand. The third front concerns the method to be adopted towards the creation of a national discourse. A moment of nationhood conceives a nation. But it’s the ensuing national discourse that actually builds the nation. The discourse defines the shape and color of the nation. Its robustness directly determines the strength of the nation; its integrity will go a long way to affect the longevity of the nation. The choice of method for such a discourse is thus of paramount importance to the nation.

Before proceeding to the examination of the three fronts in detail, a crucial caveat begs attention. The processes and events that led to the formation of Kenya as a State are not unique to Kenya. Indeed many African states share in that story, even if not in exact structure, at least in the general plot. And indeed many such States have had to deal with similar issues of identity and nation-building as we. The exposition that follows will thus apply to many African states. And it is for this reason that I believe the events of 9th March shouldn’t just be left to the whims of politics. A keen study thereof will reveal important details that will help other statesmen from across the continent also examine their own affairs. Done properly, a national discourse always provides a blueprint for other nations alike, and it is my firm conviction that, had we adopted the right method and approach, we would have reawakened the spirit of African nationalism and reignited the embers of pan-Africanism.

The American moment of nationhood shaped a nation that was to produce institutions that would become the models of the world we live in. the French moment of nationhood reverberated across Europe changing the course of Europe and giving it distinct color and shape. The Russian moment of history produced waves that washed far and wide. While we lament incessantly at the imposition of western institutions in the management of our affairs, its more astute to learn how develop our own. It’s more beneficial to learn how to interpret events and use them to structure models that mirror our set of circumstances and hence models that can work for us. It is the hallmark of our maturity to capitalize of such moments of nationhood to create a movement. The Kenyan moment of nationhood might just be the spark that will light the torch of hope and usher in a new era in Africa. For that to happen however, we need to get it right.

_~ Notes of The Grand philosopher_

**Email: [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info)**

_P.S: Am not a monarchist.. am not a democrat.. am not a republican.. am a philosopher who wants to create a just society._

_Download the full text of this BBI : FACT FICTION OR FALACY CHAPTER 1 <a href="/assets/BBI-Fact-Fiction-or-Falacy-chapter-1.docx" download="BBI-FACT-FICTION-OR-FALACY-Chapter-1">here</a>, you can also follow the series using the article suggestions below this article_
