---
title: 'BBI: Losing the moment Part 2'
date: 2021-3-15
cover: 'BBI.png'
category: 'Politics'
tags:
  - BBI
  - Politics
  - Society
---

### Essence

Earlier we defined a moment of nationhood as a union of contrasts, a pairing of contradictions, a coalition of opposites, the yin and yang. It is this holy union of opposites that produces the potency via which conceiving a nation is made possible. Just like the conception of any living organism needs the fertilization of the male and female gametes, two opposites that fuse to unlock the energy of life, so too does a body of people, a community, need the alliance of its opposing forces to bind together the bonds of unity and communion. At the moment of nationhood, the collective suffering of the past is infused with meaning and becomes a struggle. The journey becomes a cause. The dead become martyrs. The fighters become heroes. The statesmen become founding fathers. And a group of people become a nation.

So what exactly is the actual essence of a moment of nationhood? If we were to distill to the one thing that makes the moment truly significant, then it would be the meaning that is gifted to the story of a people. Without such meaning, the suffering remains just that; a painful memory on the wretchedness of life. The dead become just that; a remainder on the vanity of our existence. The fighters become just that; brave men who sacrifice their lives for naught. Meaning is the philosopher’s stone that transforms the past suffering into a glorious struggle and the bloody slaughter into a glorious revolution. But meaning is created through the art of narration. The story has to be told with masterful art for it to penetrate the heart and soul of the nation. A failure of narration will neuter the potency of the story and hence hinder the moment of nationhood from conceiving a nation. Without giving meaning to the story, the moment of nationhood will indeed be meaningless.

Going back to the “Handshake” moment, while the gesture was admirable, the manner in which it was unveiled, with the secrecy that went into the meeting of the two leaders, the evident exclusion of everybody else including close confidants, and the general suddenness of it all, ensured that the immediate reaction was one of shock as opposed to relief; one of doubt as opposed to confidence in a bright future; one of cynicism as opposed to jubilation; and most crucial, one of perceived betrayal as opposed to trust. Under such circumstances, it became very difficult to tell a story in such a manner as to infuse it with meaning. And without meaning, the potency of conceiving a nation from that moment of nationhood became neutered at the very steps of Harambee House. In deed with each retelling, while the shock abated, the cynicism only grew.

And so one direct answer to the question of why the “Handshake” failed to unite the country is that the story of the “Handshake” wasn’t infused with enough meaning. Therefore, the past suffering remained just that if not more bitter given that there was now a sense of betrayal in the story. It’s only through meaning that that past suffering could be turned into a glorious struggle culminating in that moment. Make no mistake, the moment did bring peace; but peace, especially if it’s temporary peace, is not unity. The United States and Russia are not actively trying to destroy each other with Armageddon weaponry as they tried to during the Cold war. It can thus be delicately stated that there’s peace between the two countries. But not even the most optimistic amongst us can say there’s unity between them. And therefore, while the “handshake” should be rightly credited for cooling political temperature and allowing a sense of normalcy to return, to allude to a unity that was created by the event would be superfluous delusion bordering on madness. Only the players changed sides. But the game is very much on; A game the end of which will tear the country into irreconcilable and irreparable pieces.
On the first test therefore, if we are honest with ourselves, the test of essence, we scored naught. The solution; give the story meaning.

### Platform

The momentum created during the moment of nationhood should be sustained by creating a national discourse. A national discourse refers, in the present context, both to the space within which creative work of nation-building is allowed, and the process of going about with this creativity. A nation is built with ideas. Whatever other ways you elect to conceive a nation, you can only build it with ideas. And ideas need the space for accommodation. More technically, the object of a national discourse is to frame a ruling philosophy, through which the structures of governance will be given shape and morphology.

It is at this point that the intellectual establishment really features prominently, or ideally it ought to. But this wasn’t going to be the case because of reasons I will highlight briefly. Since independence, the intellectual community has been, largely, in conflict with the State, and at times in open warfare. And this is a feature the prevalence of which is not unique to Kenya, but one that is shared by almost all post-independence African States. While the actual anatomy of this relationship is too complex to be fully covered in the space of the present entry, it should suffice to note that each generation of scholars and intellectuals has always had a very different view regarding how the State should conduct the business of ruling the society. The traditions upon which these scholars were educated have always been in conflict with the traditions upon which the politicians chose to ground the philosophy of the country. This has resulted in a bitter conflict with the intellectuals always on the losing end, with most choosing exile and others succumbing to the evil machinations of State power.

At crucial moments when the State needs her intellectuals, very few answer to the call, and those that do have been trained by past experience to toe the line. They are thus denied of the academic freedom which is a prerequisite for knowledge production. And when this knowledge involves the development of proper system for the management of State, a lot of experimentation is called for. An environment that accommodates dissent is a necessary requirement in the creation of a platform for knowledge production. Such production entails a lot of philosophizing. Philosophy, by nature demands a through questioning and deconstruction of reality to its barest elements. This is so as to reveal the essence. But experience has taught both the intellectual and the politician that questioning may involve opposition. This has resulted in the alienation of the intellectual by the politician, and sometimes self-alienation by the intellectual themselves.

Lack of a free space for intellection of and philosophizing has resulted in a restricted platform for knowledge production. And without such a platform, the creation of a national discourse becomes a mirage. The solution to this is the nurturing of an environment that supports intellectual growth and especially philosophy. To question is not to oppose; and to oppose following sufficient philosophical justification is the engine that propels any society forward. How many books were published on how capitalize on the “Handshake” and create a national discourse? How many provided details on how to go about this process? How many treatises were written to awaken the nation to the significance of the moment? How many philosophical dissertations were published touching on the nine issues highlighted by the two leaders? How many public debates were organized for the same end?

The “handshake” failed to evoke philosophical interest, a failure which belongs to both the politician and the intellectual. It is worth noticing that the three fronts are connected. A failure in infusing meaning to the story led to alienation. Many politicians and almost all intellectuals distanced themselves from the affair, terming it nothing but “a gentleman’s agreement” between two leaders. And this alienation made it difficult to conjure the appropriate platform for the initialization of a national discourse. And this failure to provide the platform, made the next stage, that of method, very problematic indeed.

### Method

We come now to the method of carrying out a national discourse.it will be remembered that the method is tied to the platform which is in turn tied to the essence of the moment of nationhood. As we have already poked holes in the other two fronts, the arguments and conclusions of this section can easily be anticipated. I will, in future entries of this series got into a deeper exposition on the mechanisms and appropriateness of a method of national discourse. For present purposes, I will only highlight few fundamental issues concerning the choice of method.
It can easily be deduced that the choice of method is anchored on the kinds of issues that form the crux of the discourse. In this case, our task is made easy by the highlighting of the nine-point agenda by the two leaders on the steps of Harambee House. That ought to have set the tone of the discourse and informed the method to use to conduct this discourse. I wish not to get into the issues now as that will form the main body of future entries, but for the sake of illustrating my point, allow me to sample the “how” questions on the list. “How to end ethnic divisions”, “how to solve polarizing elections”, “how to deal with corruption” and “how to deal with a lack of national ethos”. These four problems are simple and straightforward in their phrasing and direct in the issues they touch and the solution anticipated.

On the matter of ending ethnic divisions, the phrasing already presupposes the existence of said ethnic divisions and passes judgment on the undesirability of the impact of said divisions. To end them thus would entail an examination of how they came to be in the first place, and whether the real issue is with their existence or just the negativity that arises from their existence. The two are different conditions and they each call for a different approach. To end the ethnic lines entirely would call for cutting all tribal lines, a complete refusal to segment our society along tribal lines. This is possible as has been demonstrated by Rwanda. To end all tribal affiliations is to restructure society to make tribes non-existent, dispensing with vernaculars and promoting a national identity that supersedes and indeed eliminates tribal cultural markers. If the question is on the tensions that exist and how to diffuse them while keeping the tribes intact, then the solution has to come not from the elimination of tribes but in removing the barriers that entrench hostility and distrust. The question becomes one of fostering trust between one tribe and another. Either way, the point am illustrating is that the ensuing exercise is deeply philosophical in nature. The choice of method must thus be informed by the intellectual energy that will be required in the process of getting to an answer and in the eventual transformation of this answer into a working model.

On the matter of ending polarizing elections, it will be noted that the phrasing is problematic, given that elections are by nature polarizing. It is a contest between two sides or among several factions. Made more problematic by the fact that the nature of our politics goes to extreme lengths to make sure elections are about survival not just policies and propositions. Being a contest of survival thus, the stakes become that much more valuable and the voter is forced to make a survival choice rather than a rational one. At the heart of the matter, it will be found the endemic distrust among the tribes and factions plays a large part to contribute to this sorry state of affairs. Since if tribe A doesn’t trust B to have its best interest at heart, it will feel threatened by the harrowing prospects of having tribe B in power, and so the contest will not be one of ideas but primal survival, and in such a contest, one feels pushed into a corner to employ all means at ones disposal, including violence.

At this point in the exposition of the matter, it will be found that the phrasing of the question needs alteration to provide a realistic problem statement. It’s not a question of ending polarizing elections but the creation of a robust underlying national cohesive infrastructure that can withstand the shocks and turmoil or a polarizing election. In other words, the question is one on how to have elections, polarizing though they might be, without tearing the nation in the process. That is if we want to retain the system of choosing representatives through popular elections. To have one is to have the other. It’s a package deal. Again, like the first matter on ethnic division, this too is a very technical issue the examination of which will call for extensive intellectual resources and philosophical prowess. The choice of method of getting a solution must thus take these considerations into account.

I could go on to comment on all nine issues but the space doesn’t allow. So let the illustration of the two issues illustrate the point that the agenda for the national discourse set forth by the two leaders anticipated if not directly demanded that we choose a method that would collect the necessary intellectual bandwidth to address the issues. With this in mind, it needs no further demonstration to opine that the method adopted left a lot to be desired. While collecting the opinions of Kenyans is in order as is the case in every democracy, there’s a gaping disconnect between the intensity of the issues raised and the method selected to seek their solutions. Popular views and opinions, while they represent the voice of the people, still do not provide the appropriate method to address as deep and fundamental issues as how to restructure society and design a robust system that can withstand the brunt of polarizing elections and all the other issues that formed the agenda of the national discourse. A popular exercise, yes; a democratic one, definitely; but definitely not an academic one.

To sum, I have taken great pains to demonstrate why, at least on this very occasion, we missed the moment of nationhood. I have done this with two genuine objects in mind. First, to raise awareness into the underlying structure of our politics that has blinded us in the past and blinded us on the fateful occasion of 9th of march, when a moment of nationhood presented itself but we were unable to recognize it, or unwilling to take the appropriate steps to capitalize on it. Secondly, having thus laid the matter open, that we may embark on a search to reclaim the moment. And it’s to the matter of a possible reclamation of the moment of nationhood that we now turn.

_~ Notes of The Grand philosopher_

**Email: grand_philosopher@hyblog.info**

_P.S: Am not a monarchist.. am not a democrat.. am not a republican.. am a philosopher who wants to create a just society._

_Download the full text of this BBI SERIES : CHAPTER 1 <a href="/assets/BBI-Fact-Fiction-or-Falacy-chapter-1.docx" download="BBI-FACT-FICTION-OR-FALACY-Chapter-1">here</a>, you can also follow the series using the article suggestions below this article_
