---
title: "Youth Are The Present, Not Only The Future"
cover: "youth-today.jpg"
category: "youth affairs"
tags:
  - society
  - youth

date: "2021-08-02"
---

We can no longer afford to tolerate the cliché that youth represent the leaders of the future or the future. This widespread form of adultcentrism has been misused by those in authority and power to stereotype youth as "too young" or "inexperienced” to a point where it is trite and irritating. Time and again we have seen youth taking a stand and being the driving force in criticizing injustices like systemic corruption, inequality and pernicious dissolution of democracy all around the world. This is in addition to the fact that the growth of any society in all the social, political and economic spheres mostly depends on youth energy and ideas that renew, refresh and maintain progress. In reality, more youth have been risking their lives for a better society and world in general while most adults continue to be the silent, ignorant and arrogant majority.

To add salt to injury, the status quo and structure of societies around the world have set up an environment that is unfavorable for youth to flourish, realize and utilize their full potential. We are exposed to disproportionate social, economic and political barriers in all aspects of our lives from a society that is expecting so much from us. Poor education, high unemployment rates and limits to free expression have left youth depressed, frustrated and on a path to destruction, and this will be detrimental to the whole society.

It has been said that if you want to change the world reach out to youth. The planet currently has the largest youth generation in history, and there is no better time to change the world. The rights and voices of youth matter! Youth should be properly represented and actively involved in solving today’s complex problems, especially if these problems are related to their future and the functionality of a society. Young people represent the majority of the population in most developing countries, and Kenya is no exception.

Youth represent the most abundant asset Kenya has or will have over the near future. The reality, however, is that all sectors of our society are not moving quickly enough to include youth in their programming – whether this is be at the design phase, in decision-making processes, or after implementation. Youth participation is not just a matter of programmatic relevancy, nor should it be a tokenistic endeavor as the norm has been in the country. It is critical to nurture, support and involve youth at every stage of policies and interventions affecting them: starting from the design phase, through to implementation, and finally monitoring and evaluation. Nothing for the youth, without the youth.

This means the society must have strong educational, health and political systems among others that are effective to ensure that mainstreaming youth engagement is becoming the norm in the country. For a country where the Cabinet Secretary for Youth is Sixty-Three years old, it is evident we have a long way to go in ensuring youth are at the table where the real decision-making power is. We have so much to do to change the existing ideas and structure that make up the society itself, a task that must involve everyone with the youth playing the most important role. Collective action and an inclusive approach will be key in designing the ideal society for us presently and for our future.

As Kenyan youth, we should never doubt the influence of our own voices and power. We need to speak up and be heard, we need to take a stand and get involved on important socio-economic and political processes so we can take part in designing the present we live and the future we will face. We have to understand how change happens and not be afraid to be a part of the process. Indeed, the Future is Youth, and it will also come with problems and challenges that will need generational thinkers to be ready to solve them. The only way we can be able to ensure our society survives the future is if we come together, share ideas and act in the present.

We also need to understand that youth are not a homogenous group – not all youth are the same, want the same, or have the same opportunities. That is why investing in young people, in all their diversity is crucial. And we don’t have to wait for the society or the government to do this for us. We are the society, You and I. We must work hard to enable conditions under which young people can act on their own behalf, and on their own terms, rather than at the direction of others.

In this Information era, we can embrace technology and inform ourselves, educate others, raise awareness, support and empower one another to prosperity. We can use the digital space to share and broadcast our intuitive and diverse ideas that will replace the underlying retrogressive ones and create a strong foundation for a better society. Getting involved in forums to discuss society problems and to find and propose solutions is the way to becoming agents of true change. The future of the society lies in tapping the potential that lies in youth, only then can we secure a world that will favor us tomorrow and for generations to come.
