---
title: 'BBI: The making of the moment'
date: 2021-3-13
cover: 'BBI.png'
category: 'Politics'
tags:
  - BBI
  - Politics
  - Society
---

The declaration of independence by the thirteen colonies is significant because of the oppression the colonies were subjected to by British suzerainty. And thus the moment tells the story of an end to the oppression and a beginning of a new era of freedom, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. The statesmen, prominent among them Thomas Jefferson provided the towering vision with which to forge the identity and define the character of the new nation. The stakes at hand were the collective destinies of the millions of Americans, the security of their business enterprises and livelihoods, the liberty of their culture and customs and the freedom to shape their institutions.

In this story of struggle, the British Empire was the oppressor from whose clutches the American nation was determined to seek liberation. The sacrifices endured during the American revolutionary wars, the burdens of imperial exploitation through what was popularly phrased as taxation without representation and the alienation and over-lordship they had to endure at the hands of the masters in London, all went to render the story with penetrating realism. The statesmen who were to be immortalized as the Founding Fathers of the new nation were faced with the task of contextualizing a national discourse to create a philosophy that would illuminate the ruling institutions. Their task was to model a new path, and contrast it distinctly with the former systems.

The colonies had suffered enough and it was time to chart a new beginning. "Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States,” the Declaration aptly stated. Such a bold move demanded the resole to endure all sacrifices in order to create the new nation. “And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred Honor." That was indeed a moment of nationhood.

A little over a decade later, the institutional decay in France Ancien Régime, was reaching unbearably suffocating proportions, and the Third Estate, who comprised the majority and bore the brunt of it all, had just about had it. It was their struggle against the oppression meted out to them by their betters that was to form the material of the story in this case. Gaping social and economic inequalities, ballooning unemployment, ever-encroaching poverty, sky-rocketing food prices, a crushing and regressive tax system and the overall wretchedness of life, all went to punctuate every line in the story and fermenting the anger of the Third Estate.

Made infinitely worse by the fact that the regime refused all attempts at reforms and instead went ahead to alienate the third estate, thus effectively creating a siege situation with itself as the besieged party. The summoning of the Estates-General of 1789 therefore was but a call to bear witness to the collapse of the Ancien Régime and usher in a new era of constitutional monarchy, midwifed by a bloody revolution. The statesmen who gave this moment meaning include a long list of intellectuals of the “Enlightenment” such as Voltaire and Rousseau, through whose works and ideas the conceptualization of a new nation under a different system was made possible.

The Russian revolution led by Lenin and the Turkish revolution led by Mustafa Kamal both mirror the structure of the American and French revolutions though not in clearly defined parallels. As for the Russian revolution, it was a struggle against the decaying institutions much like the French Revolution. The Turkish revolution was both a struggle against foreign domination as well as against the stench of the decaying social structures.

The above illustrations assist us to define the roles each of the three ingredients play in creating a moment of nationhood. The story of struggle is essential because it contains the collective suffering of the population, or at least the segment of the population driving the reforms. They culminate in a moment of meaning by offering an opportunity to eclipse history and write a new chapter. The visionary zeal of the statesmen and intellectuals determine the shape the new society will take, and articulate the identity of the new nation. The stake offers a motivating force by which to make the sacrifices endurable. It is the coalition of these three ingredients that give rise to a moment of nationhood and provide the window through which to conceive a nation. The birth of every nation can be traced to a particular moment of nationhood around which the constellation of the national paraphernalia revolves.

The 9th of March 2018 offered us such a moment of nationhood for the simple reason that the three ingredients came together, whether by chance of deliberate attempt, and even if just for a brief moment. A story of struggle had been sufficiently scripted in the lead-up to the event. Human lives had been lost without discrimination as a result of frothing ethnic hatred and general distrust. Elections had been ceremonies for human sacrifice. The economy was teetering towards a total collapse. Unemployment was the chorus of this heart-wrenching sad poem. Rather than pulling together as the founding philosophy urged us to, we were pulling apart with much vigor and vengeance. Collapse was only imminent.

But the statesmen of our land, in the persons of the President and the former Prime minister stood to the occasion, and if we are to give them the benefit of doubt, despite their personal interests and ambitions, they put the country first. They opened a window for the wind of healing to breeze across our beautiful land. It is in this that a moment of nationhood was created. But only just. For, hardly had the healing started when even more painful wounds were opened. The moment came abruptly and it was gone just as quickly. For a moment of nationhood to count as such, it needs to be capitalized upon; for the window to be widened to create a path; the path to be well demarcated to create a roadmap; the roadmap to be worked on to create a shared destiny; the destiny to be believed to create an identity; the identity to be fertilized to conceive a nation.

Such however wasn’t the pattern of events as it unraveled. The moment wasn’t capitalized with much intellectual rigor as would have been expected, a condition necessary to maintain the momentum and lead to the creation of a constructive national discourse. The window was shut quickly as parties on both sides of the divide suspected mischief in the whole affair, thus, instead of creating trust, cracks of distrust leading to divergence painted the entirety of the national crust. Rather than roadmap only rifts and ridges appeared.

The more the effort to pull together was fronted, the greater the drift that formed. Suffice to say no shared destiny, no identity no conceiving of a nation. Clearly we missed the moment. But the bare admission is not enough. How did we miss it? How differently could we have contextualized events? How different could it all have been? More importantly, how many such moments have we missed in the past? Why is it that, after five solid decades since the attainment of political independence, we are still battling with such basic questions as the very identity of the nation? Is there even a nation to speak of?

_~ Notes of The Grand philosopher_

**Email: [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info)**

_P.S: Am not a monarchist.. am not a democrat.. am not a republican.. am a philosopher who wants to create a just society._

_Download the full text of this BBI : FACT FICTION OR FALACY CHAPTER 1 <a href="/assets/BBI-Fact-Fiction-or-Falacy-chapter-1.docx" download="BBI-FACT-FICTION-OR-FALACY-Chapter-1">here</a>, you can also follow the series using the article suggestions below this article_
