---
title: Why is the value of university education degenerating?
date: 2021-3-18
cover: 'QA-banner2.jpg'
category: 'Q & A'
tags:
  - Education
  - Youth
---

As a seasoned philosopher I feel obliged to share some tips on the technique of asking questions. Right answers can only come from right questions properly structured. And given that the purpose of this entry and others in this series is to engage in discourse through questions and answers, I hope the reader will appreciate this slight preliminary caveat before we begin the analysis of the question and provide a contextual answer. A good question is a specific question laid out in a specific context. The context should factor in both time and place. This limits the boundaries of one’s interlocutors within purposeful environs, in order to better provide a helpful answer. The more general the question is; the more deficient the answer will be in terms of details and utility. In the hopes that we will be able to go past those limitations already ingrained in the present query, let’s dig in and analyze the question.

The nature of the question sets the stage for the approach to be adopted and the levels of analysis demanded in order to obtain a thorough understanding. It is only after this dialysis that we can arrive at the root of the problem. The first thing that demands our attention and examination is the conception of this supposed “value”. We need to isolate the phenomenon or quality we refer to when we speak of value of university education. A more serious approach will demand that we justify our conception of value, but we will avoid those deep and entangling axiological conundrums and only restrict our interest to only that which passes for value of university education.

The second point, having arrived at a satisfactory conception of value, is the construction of a scale against which to measure this value of university education. In other words, this value, for it to be of any significant effect in our discussion, must be quantifiable against a verifiable scale. While the scale need not be scientific in the technical sense, it must retain a respectable level of objectivity. The construction of this scale must however be grounded on firm grounds depending with the society in question. Its nature is informed by the predominant societal concerns, priorities, goals and ambitions. The exercise of constructing this scale may seem arbitrary from the narrow lenses of our shallow exposition, but the object here is merely a cursory attempt to shed light on the subject in order to illuminate further study on the same. Our attempt is neither a complete nor comprehensive academic output but an interested and informed social commentary.

The next task in the sequence is to demonstrate the mentioned degeneration as measured against the established scale. Importantly, it’s not just the degeneration that is of interest, but the degree of this degeneration is equally fascinating. The degree provides scope and perspective and dictates the structure of the solutions to be designed.
The final piece is the inquiry into the reasons why such regeneration occurred. At this point an infusion of historical perspective might prove very helpful, because such reasons can only be fully appreciated in their historical and situational contexts. It will be noted that we have taken a long – some will say superfluously so – path to arrive at the point of listing the reasons why the value of university education – whatever it’s taken to be – can be said to have degenerated, however this degeneration is perceived and contextualized. The value of the tedious process and numbingly taxing method will be realized in the objectivity of the analysis and the fertility of the recommendations arrived at. Most importantly, it is the mental exercises that are of supreme significance in this space of engagement. With that detailed sketch in mind, let us now dive into the subject of our question.

The conceptualization of the value of university education opens our exposition. How exactly do we conceive value of a university education or general education for that matter? To be childishly plain, what is the point of education? The question may appear very obvious and even pedantic for those not well indoctrinated into the rigorous philosophical methods. But it is indeed a very profound and basic question, the answer to which is necessary to give us a foundational understanding on the subject at hand. It is thus a question we will neither ignore nor take its understanding as a given, but one we will take as our starting point. I will however leave out the deep analysis of what really is education and what qualities define the phenomenon called “education”. Further, I will not get into the controversy between education, training and indoctrination and the differences and similarities among them. These, I will reserve for future expositions should they be raised thusly. For present purposes therefore, our starting point is on the point or object of education in society, so that we can arrive at a conceptualization of the value of education in general and university education in particular. Hereafter, university education will be understood as the formal methods, programs and activities undertaken in institutions of higher learning, and the systems and structures that enable such undertaking.

Education, in the context used here, is a function of society whose primary object is the preparation of the young members of the given society for the life and activities of adult life, activities which aim to serve the needs of the society. The needs of a given society thus inform the type of education offered to the young generation in their preparation for future societal roles. Viewed this way, education is a system designed for the propagation of the social order to future succeeding generations, a propagation which may be seen as enabling the longevity of said society. The specific needs of each society notwithstanding, a general bird’s-eye view reveal three general goals which may be pursued in tandem or at different orders and levels, but which, nonetheless form the entirety of the “point of education” in society. To use simple language, the three goals are: the education of the citizen, the education of the worker and the education of the thinker. We will look at each in turn.

Modern societies are very complex entities which combine many systems and structures in order to function effectively. The state thus needs a complex bureaucracy. Individuals make the systems and run them and the systems in turn run the state. For optimum efficiency therefore, the society needs to educate the citizen who will run the state bureaucracy. The citizen needs to be taught the values of patriotism and integrity and any such values as are deemed necessary by the society in question. By the education of the citizen thus I mean the proper indoctrination of the young members of society to prepare them for the task of running the state in later life in different capacities.

In some societies, the entire essence of education may be confined to this one task. Several illustrations beg our attention here. In imperial China, the Confucian teachings and examinations were primarily structured in order to produce civil servants of a particular desired character. The whole point of education in the Confucian tradition was chiefly to produce the perfect citizen. In the medieval age in Europe, education was Church education and the point was to produce members of the clergy to run the Church bureaucracy. And for large parts of Western Christendom, Church bureaucracy was, for all intents and purposes also the state bureaucracy. The church was the state. In this regard, church education was the education of the citizen. In the Greek city state Sparta, education was designed to train the perfect soldier to fight for the city and defend Sparta against her many enemies. The Confucian scholar of the Hanlin Academy during the Tang dynasty, the Abbot of a monastery in western Christendom and the Spartan soldier, all received the education of the citizen albeit in different tastes and orientations. Indeed, the modern university started as an institution for the education of the citizen, in the sense illustrated above.

After the industrial revolution, it became necessary to educate the worker to run the factories and drive the economies of the capitalist nations. And this has since become a universal phenomenon and all institutions of higher learning are extensively concerned with the task of equipping the students with the necessary technical and professional skills to enable them survive in their careers and vocations. This way, the university became a place from where to educate the worker (Train is more the word, but let’s not get bogged down with semantics).
The nature of our economies and politics demand that we constantly find new innovative ways to deal with the environmental challenges or even the incessant human desire to annihilate each other in competition for resources.

This has made it a survival necessity to advance the frontiers of knowledge, to unlock new vistas, to come up with better methods and processes, to overcome the limitations of nature and trim the rugged edges of our natural environment; to create, in a word, a convenient and sustainable artificial environment. To make this possible, the university has taken the role of educating the thinker. On top of the roles already demonstrated, the university has been designed as a center for philosophical inquiry, scientific research and technological advancement.

To be able to put into context the value of university education, we must, as a prerequisite, address the trinity of citizen, worker and thinker. And like the Holy Trinity, matters can get very complicated indeed. Who is a graduate? Is he/she a citizen, a worker or a thinker? Or is he/she all in one or one in all? Is there a citizen graduate, a worker graduate and a thinker graduate or are they infused in one graduate? And how do we know which is which? What type of education did he/she receive? Like the Council of Nicaea that convened in AD 325 to discuss the nature of Christ, I invite you, esteemed reader in a debate to understand the nature of a graduate.

The subject of the present entry is on the reasons why the value of university education is degenerating. But I have taken the philosophical route in order to reveal that it’s not very clear what the university is teaching or what it ought to teach. As such the question may be mooted by the realization that the so-called degeneration may after-all be a misjudgment. Only after we solve the conundrum of the trinity can we develop a scale against which to measure the value and the degeneration thereof. We have conceived value in terms of utility, object and function and so the scale against which this value is to be measured will naturally follow those same tributaries. However, as we are not dealing with a particular context, in terms of a specific university or universities of a specific country or region of the world, what follows is purely a theoretical guide to help us draw a map of the problem and the ways in which we can go about addressing it.

Before the construction of a scale, it’s important we agree on what the role of the university ought to be. To be sure, we can always create other institutions to come to the aid of those issues the university will not be able to handle. Ideally, the university should educate the citizen, worker or thinker, but not seek to educate all three at once, because that will give rise to so much confusion and contradiction. Far be it for me to impose the designation; my interest here is purely analytical. For the sake of remaining true to the source material and in order to advance the plot of this entry, I will make the assumption that the university can and indeed is able to educate the citizen, the worker and thinker. Whether this education is collectively piled on an individual thus creating one graduate with three natures or three different graduates each with a particular nature, or any number of combinations in between, I will let the reader deal with that puzzle.

The education of the citizen can be measured on an administrative scale which we may call the Bureaucratic Efficiency Index (BEI). The education of the worker can be measured on an economic scale which we may call the Workforce Productivity Index (WPI). The education of a thinker may be measured on an intellectual scale which we may call the Knowledge Production Index (KPI). I will avoid going into the actual construction of the scales on this entry because that will make it technical as opposed to philosophical. My interest is the demonstration of how we ought to go about the issue of structuring our institutions of higher learning. We can engage on the actual construction through a platform and space suited for such technical undertaking.

With the scale thus developed, it becomes easy to measure the already quantized value of university education. And only after this measurement is done can we begin addressing what appears to be the main issue in our present question, i.e., the degenerating value of university education. We cannot however provide such reasons because of the issues already mentioned.

There’s plenty of talk about unemployment and how it’s caused, if not directly, then at least facilitated by the collapsing standards at the university. But while the problem of unemployment is a real one, it’s premature to blame the university without first settling the question of the fundamental role of the university. Indeed, this is the major problem in my opinion. Some would argue that the university is a place of research and thus should not be blamed for the market forces that produce unemployment. Others would say universities should focus on technical subjects and shelve the unnecessary theory. At the root however, there’s no agreement on the type of graduate the university should produce, which the result that the graduate the university ends up producing is neither a citizen (because he/she will not find any opportunity to run the state bureaucracy either because of overcrowding or because that’s just the way the ‘system’ works), nor a worker (because he/she will also not find meaningful employment to build a career), and definitely not a thinker (in the sense of an intellectual immersed in knowledge production). The ensuing confusion and dizzying contradiction has created a different product altogether; a Hustler. But that, esteemed readers, is a story for another day.

Far from producing answers, philosophy is about raising more questions. And so I apologize to those not used to the philosophical traditions but still had the patience to journey with me across the extensive acres of text, only to arrive at the end not with answers but with more questions.
Such, dear reader, is philosophy.
And I am,
Yours Truly
Grand Philosoher.

You can send your queries to the Grand Philosopher through the emails [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info) or [info@hyreads.com](mailto:info@hyreads.com).<br>

To engage is to educate; to educate is to enlighten; to enlighten is to empower. Let’s engage for a better world and Just Society. You can also get in touch via twitter **[@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)**
