---
title: How Can Corruption In Kenya Be Contained? Part 2
date: 2021-3-22
author: Grand Canyon
cover: "https://source.unsplash.com/random"
category: "Q & A"
tags:
  - Society
  - Governance
  - Leadership
---

Greed is the fuel that facilitates inter-species competition for resources. And this competition is only a reaction to the perceived limitation of resources. And this limitation only becomes problematic because everyone wants to survive. If the syntax were reversed, perhaps ‘greed’ wouldn’t occupy our imagination at present. But the case is otherwise and so we must get it right. My interest is in examining whether our treatment of ‘greed’, a universal phenomenon, is a justified and fair one. As we have seen, greed is consequential of the existence of a state of competition for resources, and itself a consequence of the perceived deficiency. As such, it appears we have no much power over greed save perhaps to control it; however this is supposed to work. But to deny its existence or the legitimacy of said existence, will not be the reasonable thing to do.

The reason why greed gets such a bad press is because it is attributed to the collective human suffering, especially for the weaker members of the society. Poverty is said to be a result of the greed of the weak. The poor conditions of the workers are said to be because of the greed of the capitalist. Those who ‘have’ are said to have oppressed those who ‘have not’, in their greedy pursuit of their endeavors. Whether this is true or not doesn’t concern us; at not at the present moment; our concern is the appreciation of greed as a general survival ingredient. Given that even the weak and the poor still persist in the preservation of their lives, it can be argued that even they have elements of this ‘greedy’ nature, with the only difference between them and their betters being that they belong on the unfortunate end of the distribution channel.

And so, poverty, in this regard may be seen as a problem of distribution; which, while still posing fundamental problems, is a step upwards from blaming it on something shared by all humans and all species in general.
And so we come to the point being advanced here, that the interaction of humans with their surrounding is one of a competitive nature, and to facilitate this competition, greed comes in as a necessary survival fuel. It is therefore not something to be fought, for such a fight will be against human nature itself and will result in annihilation, the opposite of self-preservation. This now brings us to the next point in our analysis, viz.; the various steps society has undertaken to ensure that human relationship are structured in a cooperative manner. Because here it must be pointed out that society depends on cooperation on a large scale in order to function. And so, throughout the over ten thousand years of the existence of structured human societies, various attempts have been made to arrive at a workable arrangement among members of a given society, so that while each will pursue a livelihood guided by their self-preservation instincts, on the whole, there will be cooperation that will also guarantee even greater survival. As to whether these attempts have proved fruitful is beside our concern at the moment. We need to demonstrate these two points so that we can lay a firm ground upon which to build our understanding of corruption.

Attempts by society to mesh together constructive arrangements for maximum cooperation usually take on the layout of ethical systems that seek to moderate if not control human behavior. These systems of ethics or morality are sometimes grounded on the appeal to human nature but in most cases they come grounded on a system or rewards and punishments in order to motivate correct behavior for the former and prevent indecent or unacceptable conduct for the latter. The point to note is that, the method of constructing a system of ethics notwithstanding, the importance of such a system lies in the effectiveness with which it works, a failure of which, as we will observe, occasions the phenomenon we call corruption.

For the system of ethics to work therefore, care must be taken in the course of its construction to ensure that the behavior to be motivated or encouraged doesn’t run into conflict with the principle of self-preservation, for otherwise such a system will be bound to fail in very disastrous designs. Self-preservation trumps, by significant degrees, social order, and so when social order is constructed in arrangements that don’t factor in self-preservation or completely stifles it, the result is nasty. The next point is that, for the system of ethics to work, considerations of reality or the unbreakable and unchangeable orientation of the surrounding nurturing environment must be taken into account.

Without bathing into further details, the point i am illustrating here is that in the progression of human societies, some attempts have been made at constructing ethical systems, attempts which did not take the two considerations seriously leading to the creation of contradictions the resolution of which gave birth to a new phenomenon called corruption. And so at last, dear reader, we arrive at a point when we can hazard a tentative definition of corruption, all preliminary material having been assembled already. But before we do just that, perhaps a recap is in order. We have demonstrated human nature within the lenses of self-preservation, and have shown how this comes about, even though just cursory. We have seen how, through the competition for survival resources, humans, by nature are greedy, in order for each to advance their chances.

We have demonstrated how, society, in a bid to achieve wholesale cooperation, designs systems of ethics with different groundings, in order to regulate human behavior. And we have hinted that when such systems break down due to their failure to take into account the supremacy of the principle of self-preservation and the ordering of the natural environment through which exploitation sustaining resources are sourced, the resulting phenomena is destructive and distasteful, and we will hereafter call it corruption.

So what exactly is corruption? Corruption, in the sense employed and understood in this essay will be taken to be the phenomenon in human behavior and relationships that result when a system of ethics fails to bring about the desired behavior amongst members of a society, leading to a disintegration of the established social order and the uncooperative competition for sustaining resources, with the casualties that such uncooperative competition occasions. Corruption thus defined can only be outlined in the subjective lenses of a particular ethical system. It is the deviation, aided by the reason mentioned, from the established traditions of an ethical system that characterize the phenomenon of corruption. And so, corruption is by nature a moral or ethical judgment. It can only be examined against the background of a system of ethics, and not against the scale of human nature. Another point is that corruption is a behavioral phenomenon and so in seeking ways of addressing it, the question of how to regulate human behavior must take center stage. With this understanding in mind, we can now proceed with our analysis on how to contain it. But first, let’s first establish our position regarding the matter of containment.

The reason why we advance and promote the approach of containment is because the alternatives are very problematic indeed. Having observed the nature of corruption, the natural question is what is to be done about it. The phenomenon is a consequence of the breakdown of an ethical system. Therefore, at the core, it’s not the presence of something but rather its absence. It’s not a thing that can be isolated and “fought”. It is a darkness that requires the illumination of light. To fight corruption presupposes the existence of something real to be fought. But as we have shown, corruption is not a thing or object, but rather the consequence of a moral breakdown. Such being the case therefore the only sane approach is one of containment, where such containment is conceived along the lines of either reconstructing another ethical system, or reevaluating behavior and behavioral expectations in line with the prevailing realities. But perhaps a bit more details as to how the effort of containment is to be undertaken deserve respectable mention.

The ethical system preaches and teaches an ideal which is expected to shape and regulate behavior on a large scale order so as to produce a workable arrangement via which to structure relationships in society. Once the breakdown has happened, the reasonable measures to be adopted must necessarily begin with the task of reconceptualization of this Ideal and hence the reconfiguration of the ethical system. This exercise, though by nature deeply philosophical should be undertaken by the moral custodian of the given society. Different societies have different moral custodians. For some, it is the religious leader, for others, it is the philosopher, and for a few - for some ungodly reasons - it is the politician. Whatever the case may be, at the point of reconceptualization of the Ideal and hence the reformulation of the ethical system, the moral custodian should take the lead.

The next step concerns rigorous indoctrination of this ideal which forms the backbone of the system of ethics, to the young members of the society. I say rigorous because, morality isn’t something to be digested rationally, since at the core it seeks to automate human behavior to a particular alignment. To achieve this automation, it is imperative to take extra care to design a system of indoctrination through which the ideal is ‘drilled’ into the young members of the society, so that they grow into the desired mold. Another reason why we favor the approach of containment is because real and productive work can only be done to children. The teaching of the ideal can only be made possible when the subjects are still young and thus impressionable. Once they grow into adults, effective indoctrination is no longer possible unless you include mild to severe electrocution as a disciplinary mechanism. And if you must go to such extreme lengths, then what’s really the point?

Once indoctrination is well undertaken, great effort should then be advanced towards creating a supporting architecture in the environment, so that the Ideal doesn’t clash with Necessity. Ethical systems break when they fail to take into account the nurturing environment and the pressures that this environment can exert of the individual and provide them with an opposite compelling force to shape behavior, contrary to the dictates of the Ideal. In short, the makers of the society should ensure that they create an environment that can accommodate the flourishing of the Ideal, otherwise, they will realize at great cost, just how powerful the principle of self-preservation is. Of course this architecture must include a system of rewards and punishment or at least the vivid promise thereof.

Such is the brief sketch on how generally society may contain corruption. The method of containing corruption entails the immediate going back to the drawing board. Once it becomes clearly manifested that the ethical system has broken down, it also brings to the fore a terrifying fact, i.e., the young members of society don’t have a system of indoctrinating them into adult life. And this points to even more danger than adults misbehaving. And so the priority ought to go to piecing together the Ideal and constructing an elaborate system of indoctrination. This way, the lapse of corruption becomes only brief and transitory, since the succeeding generation will grow up with a different mold and replace the temporary rot with rejuvenating nourishment. But if the makers of society make the mistake of ‘fighting’ corruption, and expend a great part of their energy in an undertaking bound to come to an embarrassing and costly collapse, they will neglect the greater danger of the absence of a robust system of indoctrination of the young generation. Eventually, the present chaos will look like a picnic when compared to monstrosities actively being created through neglect.

But being true to our source material, to wit, how to contain the corruption in Kenya, we are unable to end our essay before an analysis of the Kenyan context. The question already presupposes the existence of this corruption and only directs us to find a way on how to deal with it. To avoid making this essay unnecessarily long, I will grant the presupposition, that is, indeed we have corruption in Kenya. I will not burden myself with the demonstration of this existence. My interest lies in demonstrating why this existence is so. I take as my reference point the definition of corruption already established. But as will be shown, to put it in a specific Kenyan context is not a very easy exercise.
To contextualize corruption in Kenya, we must first make reference to the founding Ideal of the nation, the Ideal upon which the system of ethics is constructed. And it’s at this point of departure that certain fundamental problems begin to emerge.

For instance, it is a laborious task to even put in a simple sentence what the founding Ideal of the Kenyan Nation really was. The Kenyan society has grown out of the residual elements of the colonial state, itself borrowing its institutions and moral principles from the stock of the colonizing power. As such we are unable to point to a Kenyan Ideal independent from the colonial makeup or association. And this makes the task of isolating a Kenyan ethical system for purposes of examination, an impossible task at best. And without such isolation and the subsequent examination, answering our question becomes a matter of speculation. This confusion is not unique to Kenya. Indeed Kenya shares this confusion with many African states that went through the same process of conception, but it is Kenya that is on trial in our present analysis.

Constitutionally, Kenya is a secular state and so doesn’t rely on religious formulations in the ordering of social life and in particular the construction of an ethical system. But even if we granted that statement validity, and accept it for the sake of argument, we are still left with a gaping problem which is that there is no codified system of ethics of a secular type to speak of that can be summoned for our analysis. Some would be quick to point to the traditional values of an African society as acting as an anchoring pole for our system of ethics. But problems will only compound should we adopt that kind of leaning. For, even these African values lack the indoctrinating architecture via which to be passed to the young generation. In an age when the vernacular languages are fading away in use and significance, it is hypocrisy of a premium kind to make the suggestion that we still have our traditional values and ethical systems to provide moral anchorage.

And so the longer we examine the matter, the clearer it gets that the Kenyan society lacks a robust system of ethics. Grated, there are still religious institutions that still hold sway as regards the nurturing of the young generation, but since officially the Kenyan society is of a secular mold, these religious institutions and values lack the teeth with which to bite, and thus become empty slogans. It will be remembered that a system of ethics must be extended through the provision of an implementation mechanism that must include a system of rewards and punishment. But if the legal and judicial apparatus of the state don’t institute these rewards and punishments based on the religious and doctrinal layouts, then the power of the religious establishment becomes neutered. And this brings us to the conclusion that the Kenyan society lacks a comprehensive and robust ethical system.

This revelation or realization may be scary or liberating depending on one’s perspective. It is scary to those who would like to believe otherwise since a world without order and structures is terrifying to them. It is liberating to those who will see this as an opportunity to start work on a national Ideal and a system of ethics. But whatever leaning we take, we cannot escape the present reality. The pervading corruption which extends on an omnipotent and omnipresent scale did not conceive itself. It is as a result of structural deficiency to construct a moral system and indoctrinate the young generation using this system.

But a further point begs mention. We mentioned before that corruption is a moral judgment that can only be perceived through the lenses of a particular ethical system. But if we lack such a system, from what basis are we able to make the judgment and assessment? What is our measuring scale along which calibration we are able to detect the moral degeneration and societal rot? Confronting this question only deepens our shock into the penetrating confusion that dots our social structures. Are we basing our moral judgments on the already mooted African values and traditions? Are we basing it the foundations of mainstream religious doctrines? Or are we basing it on the foundation doctrines of our former colonial masters? What exactly is our reference point? This is a difficult question and one I would like to reserve for a future entry. Let it suffice for present purposes to illustrate the murky waters on which our vessel is anchored.

Be that as it may, the incomprehensible confusion and contradictions don’t hinder our path towards restructuring our society – our accommodation of these confusions and contradictions is purely for intellectual amusement – and it is to this direction I would now like to turn as I wind this analysis.
How can we contain corruption? First we must designate a moral custodian for our society so that such custodian can guide and shepherd the process of transformation and restructuring. The criteria to be used is not important only the considerations which are to be given attention in the process of such designation. And the main consideration is the awareness and maximum appreciation of the nurturing environment and the specific ways in which our society interact with that environment. The custodian must be a party that is alive to the needs of the population and creative enough to design systems that are in touch with reality. It is important to understand the 21st century and learn to embrace it with its entire accompaniment. This will bring the custodian closer to the reality on the ground and this will inform the relevance of the process to be undertaken.

Once the structure of society is understood, contextualized and fully appreciated, then the next step of the formulation of an Ideal and the subsequent ethical system will be undertaken in an illuminated fashion and there will be hope that the eventual systems will produce desirable results. The details of the actual process have already been enumerated in sufficient detail and need not be repeated here.

I wind this long entry by a reemphasis on the danger of fighting corruption in the manner we have grown used to observing. The more you attempt to fight corruption the further and deeper it grows. On top of the actual cost both material and human, that this fight will claim, the real danger lies in the fact that future generations will be introduced to society having not undergone any indoctrination into the proper or desirable ways of moderating their behavior and interactions amongst themselves and their nurturing environment. And without such a system in place, it should be expected that the ensuing menace will be beyond the wildest exaggerations of our imagination.
At the point of the initial detection of a failure of the ethical system – for this can easily be detected – work must begin immediately on the process of creating an Ideal. And that, beloved readers, is how we can contain corruption.
As I mentioned earlier, what I have offered here doesn’t even cross the threshold of ‘brief analysis’ the subject being one that is as common and consequential as corruption. My hope was the opening of the gates so that the real discourse on the subject can start. It is my sincere expectation that this short essay will help illuminate constructive discourse on how best to structure a system of ethics in our societies. And more than anything, I trust my method of analysis will prompt the reader into questioning everything.

Thank you for your time. See you next time when we’ll take the time to respond to another one of the questions asked by another reader. Until then, I am,
Yours Truly
Grand Philosopher.

You can send your queries to the Grand Philosopher through the emails [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info) or [info@hyreads.com](mailto:info@hyreads.com).<br>

To engage is to educate; to educate is to enlighten; to enlighten is to empower. Let’s engage for a better world and Just Society. You can also get in touch via twitter **[@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)**
