---
title: What Is The Danger of Single Parenting To Girls and Boys?
date: 2021-3-23
author: Grand Philosopher
cover: "https://source.unsplash.com/random"
category: "Q & A"
tags:
  - Society
  - Parents
  - Youth
---

Family is the foundation of society. It is within a family set-up that the children are able to get proper care during their growth and development as regards the provision of their sustaining needs. More importantly, it is within a family set up that the child is provided with the immediate environment from which they learn to grow into desirable members of the society. And so the institution of family is one that ought to occupy a significant span of our attention especially in the 21st century when a breakdown of the traditional family setups is all but evident.

The present question is one that will demand of us to dive into the structure of the family with the object of gathering the ideal requirements the child needs in the course of their development and how such requirements may fall short when the role of parenting is left to one parent. It will not be a fair treatment to the subject if we don’t spend some time to describe the phenomenon of single parenting, why it is on the rise, the general impact of this and what may be done in order to mitigate this impact. But in order to understand single parenting, we must first understand parenting in general and appreciate the role it plays in the development of a child. The physical needs of a child are easy to wrap our heads around because they can be reduced to measureable metrics and their contribution to the development of a child can be measured accordingly. In the event of a deficiency, the impact can be measured as well.

In a structured society where gender roles are well demarcated, it is easy to see which party is responsible for the provision of what category of needs and therefore when such a party is excluded in parenting, the vacuum created can easily be measured as well. But parenting is much more than just the provision of physical material needs and it is especially when the focus shifts to non-material needs that our analysis enters into an impenetrable maze. Because emotional needs, far from being able to be put on a measuring scale like their physical counterparts, pose very significant challenges even in the mere conceptualization of them. And so our analysis will not be a simple and straightforward one, but will require us to call into employment devices from many academic fields and take on many different tangents in order to properly ground our understanding of the subject matter. But first things first; let us lay down the general structure and sequence of our exposition.

The first thing to be taken under consideration will be our conception of the institution of family because it is this conception that defines the role of parenting and that role will structure our plot. Specifically, our exposition will focus on the type of environment the institution of family ought to create for the proper nurturing of the children. It is the provision of this environment that makes the family setting an important and indeed basic framework in the construction of a structured society. We will adopt different perspective so that we can canvas the many environmental requirements be they of a physical, emotional or social nature, that need to come together to ensure the development of the children to maturity.

The specific ingredients that need to come together in the creation of the perfect environment will inform the role of parenting in the family and society in general. Because it is through parenting that measures are taken to ensure that the optimum conditions are availed and maintained in a sustainable way. As the structure of the nurturing environment is of a material, emotional and social nature, the role of parenting too is diverse. While too much technical detail will be avoided, sufficient attention will be given by way of providing a sketch of a syllabus for parents to call to aid as they seek to create the conditions that form the nurturing environment for their children.

Having demystified parenting thusly, we will arrive at the point of performing a critical dialysis of the deficiency of single parenting and in the ways in which this deficiency may prove detrimental in the development of the children, both boys and girls. Said deficiency will be measured against the background scale of the ideal nature of parenting. It is important to see the exact danger of single parenting and the nature of this danger. Only then can we design mitigating measures given that the phenomenon of single parenting is one that is very much on the ascendency in the modern world.
So what exactly is a family? We will define family here from the perspective of the nurturing environment of the child since that is the perspective that interests us in this entry. In a previous entry when talking about the issue of marriage, we defined marriage in terms of the objective of the marital union which was procreation and the raising of a family. We even went so far as to demonstrate how, in the event procreation is out of the question, such marital union is bound to collapse very fast. Our present entry relates to the mentioned family and the various aspects that characterize it. As will be used in this context, family is the collectivity of the conditions, material or otherwise that come together to create a nurturing environment for the development of children from infancy to maturity, where this nurturing environment is understood in terms of the system for the provision of the sustaining needs for the development of the child. Three types of this nurturing environment will concern us here. They are the _Physical environment_, _Emotional environment_ and _Social environment_. We will look at each in turn.

The physical nurturing environment refers to the availability of the physical conditions needed for the provision of nourishments and such other survival needs as are required for the proper development of the human being. Prominent among them are the basic needs of food, clothing and housing. The physical environment, being, well... physical, tends to get a lot of attention. Traditionally it was the male partner in the marriage that was charged with the task of ensuring the physical environment is well catered for. To construct this physical environment, the male parent needed to have a means of livelihood. However in the modern world with the lines separating gender roles blurring by the day, it’s not exactly clear on whose shoulders the responsibility of creating the physical nurturing environment should be placed. The debate is still on going, but on balance, a working arrangement seems to be the sharing of the responsibility between the partners. We will examine this in detail in subsequent passages. For now, the point to be emphasized is that the creation of the physical environment for the nurturing of the family is of the highest importance as regards the general survival of the children. It offers stability and security. But as prominent a role as it plays, it is but a fraction in the general nurturing environment to be created.

The emotional environment is a bit tricky to define. In fact, I am skeptical as to the suitability of the name ‘emotional’ since the name makes connotations that may cloud our understanding of this type of environment. For this second type of environment tends to create the entirety of the structure of the mental faculties of the developing child. A little illustration is very much in order. The cognitive development of a child is of such a nature that through the process of ego-scripting described in a previous entry, the mind develops by ‘learning’ from the surrounding environment. By the creation of a mental script that interprets the aspects observed in the physical environment, giving those aspects names and identities and storing the information in a memory bank. Cognition of the outer environment is thus dependent on the mental scripting that takes place, the rate at which it takes place, the vocabulary accumulated with the progression of time and the total catalogue of objects, phenomena and abstract ideas accumulated in the course of the development of the child.

However, while this cognitive development will still take place even without the agency of a family set-up, the family provides specific context with specific people and the cognitive identification of this specific context gives rise to the creation of kinship bonds and relationships. While it is beyond the scope of this entry to go into the nitty gritty of psychological principles, it must be mentioned, by way of illustration, that the eventual personality of an individual results out of the collective structure and form of relationships developed during the process of childhood development. And so, the kinds of kinship relationship created and facilitated by the family environment go a long way to shape the emotional architecture of the individual in future life. Emotions, as they were, are but biochemical responses to environmental stimuli and their structure and character in an individual depends on the environment and relationships that characterize the childhood of said individual.

The building of relationships is the foundation of the construction of a social environment, and in this regard, the family plays a crucial role as well. From the learning of a language for communication and the familiarization of the ideas and concepts contained and communicated through that language, a sense of identity begins to emerge and this sense of identity creates the foundation for the creation of community bonds. And it is these community bonds that end up creating a cohesive society. The ideas or ideals upon which the child is indoctrinated will create an identity, when the child, through the agency of language discovers that others also share in the same ideas or ideals. And this identity is the basis for social cohesion and integration, without which society cannot function. And so the family set up, to the extent that it facilitates the absorption of ideas to the child or children, and the acquisition of a language for communication, plays a very crucial role in creating a social nurturing environment, which ensures the child will be absorbed into the larger society. The social environment also teaches the child the value of cooperation in the organization of life, and the skills to be mastered in order to function optimally in a cooperative society. It is in formalizing this social environment that education or indoctrination of the child features prominently. And as demonstrated elsewhere, such education or indoctrination is always defined against the needs of the society in question. The education will take after the character of the larger society.

To summarize, the conception of family from the perspective of the development of the child is along the lines of creating a nurturing environment to support the optimal growth, development and survival of the children from childhood to adult life, or at the very least to a mature age. We have looked at this nurturing environment from three lenses, physical, emotional and social and we have seen how the family brings about the necessary conditions for the creation of this nurturing environment. The next stage in our analysis is examining how the parents work to bring about the creation of the nurturing environment.

In short what the role of parenting is in creating the nurturing environment.
With a traditional or structured family set up where gender roles are clearly demarcated, it is easy to divide the responsibilities and designate roles as regards the creation of the nurturing environment. However, when the gender roles are not clearly defined, the task of designating parenting roles and dividing responsibilities becomes a complicated affair. For example, in the event where both the male and female parents are engaged in full-time career life, whose responsibility is it to provide the material sustenance for the building of the physical environment? And given that both parents have to work and thus spend limited time at home, with which parent should the child build the primary relationships? And if these primary relationships are not built with parents but with outsourced house-helps who have no emotional stake in the process and thus no attachment in the exercise, how do we deal with the eventual emotional disorientation on the part of the child? Who exactly takes on the role of educating the child into the ways of society? Who teaches the child morals and with what right do they take on that role? And when eventually all these parenting roles get juggled up so much do we still end up with a functional family in the end? And if we are not sure of the eventual form and shape of family created, upon what foundations are we able to define and describe the character of our society?

Such are the problems that confront us as we try to isolate the role of parenting in general in the modern world. With confusion abounding, it is indeed no wonder that modern societies are dogged with very basic problems such as the erosion of morals and social values. While most are normally quick to rub blame on the uniqueness and the complexity of life in the 21st century what with the internet and all, it is the firm belief of this author that societal problems are, at the core, family problems. When the structures of family are properly established, the society will become functional and desirable. But if we are unable to deal with the fundamental family problems, then the inevitable societal problems will become too overwhelming for any rational exposition, let alone practical solutions.

Since the actual business of restricting the family unit is beyond our scope, we will limit our efforts to the listing of parental roles even though we are alive to the fact that modern layout of society poses significant challenges for the actualization of these roles. Our aim is to get us to the section of single parenting, and the present section is the bridge to get there. And perhaps, it is because of this disorientation of the family order that the phenomenon of single parenting is on the rise.

Following the structure of the family already laid out, the role of parenting is on the facilitation of the nurturing environment by the parents, through whatever workable arrangement as may be deemed feasible. The creation of the physical nurturing environment requires material sustenance the obtaining of which calls for financial ability. The primary consideration of two adults discussing marital union should thus be on the means in place or to be put in place to ensure the structures of their family are constructed on pillars that guarantee financial stability. The party to ensure this facilitation or the ratio with which this facilitation is to be divided between the two parties is no longer of significance in the modern world. But the formula notwithstanding, the creation of a financially stable family structure is of supreme importance, and before said structure is laid out, is inadvisable and indeed grossly unethical to even entertain the idea of procreation. Whatever else may be said of love, the business of raising a family is a practical affair and must be planned for on rational and practical considerations.

The emotional nurturing environment is one that calls for availability of the parents in the formative years of raising the children and most significantly the discipline of their coexistence, since what is of interest here is the observable material against which the child gets to learn the outside world. The character of the parents and their coexistence thus provide the primary syllabus for the ego-scripting process, a process which will result into the personality of the adult. In the interest of the children therefore, it is a moral responsibility for the parent to demonstrate acceptable and desirable conduct especially when in the presence of their children.

As regards the social environment, it falls upon the parent to select the best indoctrination system and ideology as best they can, and provide the much needed guidance in order to shape the children into the appropriate social mold. Such decisions as what religion to follow or if at all, what system of ethics to adopt, the material for the education of the child, and any such decisions, fall on the discretion of the parents. Society at large depends on the good judgment on the part of the parent to create such an environment as will ensure the child grows to be a productive and cooperative member of the society.

With all this in mind, what then can we say is the danger to single parenting? In the context of our modern word, it is indeed possible for a single parent, whether male or female, to adequately provide a sustainable physical environment. Indeed, in most cases, such is not the case as the task of financial facilitation may become overwhelming at times. Unfortunate as that is, we must emphasize the point that such a failure is not as a result of one’s gender but other accompanying macroeconomic externalities. For example, while unemployment may make it difficult to sustain a family, such unemployment is as a result of external factors and cannot be cited as resulting from single parenting. Indeed even when both parents are present in the family, unemployment may still be a biting problem to either one or both of them. And therefore, on the physical side of things, single parenting doesn’t pose a significant danger, and in cases where it does, the danger exists not because of single parenting but in spite of it.

On the social side, the roles of parenting can easily be absorbed by the state or any other authoritative organ of society, as indeed that has proven to be the case in the modern world. We see the state taking over the role of education with the parent playing a very peripheral part in the education of the children. The state chooses the curriculum, the system of ethics, the gradation system, the time of education, etc., and makes all these compulsory. With the presence of parents or just one, it appears the parents don’t have much say as regards the education of their children. It is against this backdrop we make the claim that single parenting doesn’t pose any significant danger as regards the construction of the social environment for the child.

The danger of single parenting, if one exists, has to do with the facilitation of the emotional environment for the development of the child. The complete exposition and enumeration of this danger will take us to a full treatise entirely and so we will not attempt such a lengthy project in the limited space we are left with here. But what we can do is paint a brief map of the nature of this danger. We have already talked of the formation of relationships in a previous passage, and demonstrated why the availability of the parents is crucial to enable the child learn how relationships work. As this task of forming relationships will characterize every aspect of the future existence of the child, it is important delicate care be taken to ensure this learning is structured and fruitful. More importantly, it is crucial that the presence of both parents be ensured for that will provide balance and lead to the creation of a full personality.

The failure of many adults in building and maintaining functional relationships whether they are of a romantic, sexual or friendship nature or any such other relationships can directly be attributed to the faulty or deficient learning process during the formative and developmental years. Even the whole matter of sexuality and sexual orientation has its basis on the way the child learnt to build relationships and most crucially, what was not learnt.
I hope to get into further details on the same in a future entry for the subject bears such foundational importance in our lives that it’s very embarrassing just how little attention we have given it in academic discourse. For now however, this is all the analysis our space can allow us. I hope I have been helpful in the contextualization of the matter of family and parenting, but if due to my innate ignorance and intellectual shallowness I have failed in that regard; then I am truly hopeful that I have at least provided an interesting literature that will add flavor to our social discourses.

Thank you for your time and see you next time.
With Love,
Grand Philosopher.

You can send your queries to the Grand Philosopher through the emails [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info) or [info@hyreads.com](mailto:info@hyreads.com).<br>

To engage is to educate; to educate is to enlighten; to enlighten is to empower. Let’s engage for a better world and Just Society. You can also get in touch via twitter **[@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)**
