---
title: Why do marriages and relationships crumple so fast in the 21st century?
date: 2021-3-17
author: Grand Philosopher
cover: "https://source.unsplash.com/random"
category: "Q & A"
tags:
  - Society
  - Marriages
  - Relationships
---

The phrasing of the question poses a number of challenges, which we need to confront before we can get to the crux of the subject matter. The first is spatial context. We need to situate the matter within a particular geographical setting or cultural context. Marriage in general is a social construct and therefore takes a cultural coloration. This means that the idea of marriage differs from one culture to the next, both in principle and practice. As such, to get to address the question of why marriages are short-lived, it is necessary to isolate the particular culture where this is prevalent and perform a contextual analysis with the said culture as the reference point. The second challenge regards the specificity of the type of marriage. Since the temporal setting of the question is cast in the 21st century, it is imperative to acknowledge that the idea of marriage in the 21st century takes on a very diverse interpretation and many unions or relationships which in earlier times would not be recognized as marriages are today acknowledged as such. The structural nature of gay marriages, for instance, differs a great deal from heterosexual arrangements, and an exposition into their short-lived time-frames will naturally take on a different tangent from the one of the latter. The third point is the presupposition implied by the question. By using the superlative degree, it is presupposed that marriages have a tendency to crumple, but the problem in the 21st century is that they seem to crumple with shocking speed and rapidity. In which case the question directs us to examine not why marriages collapse - as that has been taken as a given – but into the accelerating factors, which, in the 21st century, are more pronounced than ever before. With this in mind, I will make some assumptions to give us a working context with which to answer the question.

The first assumption is that the problem implied in the question is of a general and universal character, the consequence being that all cultures experience it in one form or the other. The second assumption is that the marriages referred to here are those of the heterosexual kind. Homosexual marriages will be excluded, not withthe intention to discriminate against gay couples, but principally because they are structurally different from heterosexual marriages, and therefore the problems they face are different in kind. Mixing the two will only complicate matters beyond necessary limits. It will further be assumed that, even in good times, it is the tendency of marriages to end before “death do us part”, but society has devised mechanisms to ensure they remain intact for as long as possible. The question is: why is this no longer working? Against this backdrop, we can arrive at a serviceable definition of marriage. Marriage, in our present context, refers to the union of a man and woman, of legal age, with the intent, whether expressly stated or not, of raising a family. Relationships will hereafter be taken to be those of a romantic nature during the courtship periods that culminate in said marital union.

From the above definition, three crucial characteristics of marriages are apparent, and we will look at each in turn, within the context of our problem statement, i.e., why do marriages crumble so fast? The nature of this union, the legal age when this union is permissible and the final object of raising a family, are the three characteristics that will be analyzed in order to shed light on, and provide answers as to why, marriages crumple so fast in the 21st century. But first, let’s talk about the matter of romantic relationships as it’s an easier subject to digest and also because it acts as a precursor to the actual marital union, and more often than not, problems that grow and bud during marriage, germinate at this stage.

Very briefly, romantic relationships are premised on the notion of “falling in love” which is the phrase used to describe the hormonal reaction when human beings, past the age of puberty discover a channel or passage-way to revert back to the primal and childhood vulnerability of complete dependence on others for biological nourishments and emotional needs. This channel, which is made complete when two people complement each other in this regard, is, by nature, temporary and transient. “Falling in love” has nothing to do with the all-too-real biological drive for mating and procreation, and more significantly, has nothing to do with “real love”. It is but a reaction to the desire to dump the childhood baggage or fill an emotional void. Millions of acres of text have been written on the subject and I do not intend to get into the technical details in this space. Let it suffice to mention that, while the phenomenon of “falling in love” is natural and legitimate – given the nurturing process and mechanisms of development of the human species – it’s not a sufficient threshold for building a marital union. The problem arises when it’s not only mistaken as such, but designated as the most crucial factor for marriage. “Falling in love” is an illusion. A necessary illusion, yes; but still an illusion.

A romantic relationship can only last fruitfully during the period when this illusion is sustained. When the illusion breaks, the relationship, as an inevitable consequence, collapses. The length of this relationship depends on how deep the emotional voids of the partners go, and how willing each is to accommodate the baggage of the other. My personal opinion is that the quicker they collapse the better, because if the illusion stays long enough to be confused as a legitimate reason upon which to establish a marital union, then it will occasion bigger problems than the temporary “heart-break”. Marriage is about limitations, not freedom; a prison cage, not a paradise; a decision to be rigorously contemplated rationally, not on base emotional whims. Marriage is a serious enterprise and should thus be premised on a strong and rigid foundation. And to illustrate just how serious an enterprise it is, let’s now turn to marriage.

The establishment of a marital union presupposes certain conditions and expectations, depending on the culture in question. Marriage, being a social institution carries with it some cultural underpinnings. Crucial and relevant among these is the notion of gender roles and gender dominance. Since most societies adopt a patriarchal order with the male as the dominant party, let’s ride with this in order to illustrate the point. With all the campaigns in affirmative action, the girl-child is increasingly occupying the same and equal station as the boy-child, if not surpassing the latter all-together. What this means is that, the notion of gender roles and gender dominance doesn’t have a place in the 21st century. However, most marital unions are still being established with gender dominance inherently implied. This sets certain expectations which violently collide with reality in the subsequent years, months, or sometimes even days of the said marital union. When the partners are unable to come to a workable arrangement, the marriage will inevitable end, and even if it survives, it will be a dead marriage either way.

This problem far goes beyond the boundaries of marriage. In the 21st century, the era of equality, how do we demarcate gender roles? Can we even dare such an enterprise? And without gender roles, on what arrangement do we construct a marital union? To illustrate the point further, allow me to cite one crucial element of marriage that renders the matter more problematic. The issue of dowry. Whatever else can be said about equality in marriage, when this marriage is instituted following the payment of dowry, an implied dominance is established. Otherwise, if both partners are on equal footing, why should only the man pay this “token of appreciation” to effect the union? What really is the point of dowry in the 21st century? The expectations baked in during the establishment of the union provide the key catalysts for its collapse; especially when they clash with reality giving rise to contradictions. I have cited only one – gender roles and gender dominance – but that is not even a tip of this ginormous iceberg. I have cited it because it is very pertinent as a 21st century phenomenon.

The matter of legal age concerns the contradiction that arises between the object of marriage, herein taken to be procreation and the raising of a family, and the biological clock that dictates such processes. Taking 18 as the standard for legal age, and 12 or even 10 as the standard for biological age for procreation, the question arises as to what mechanisms society has put in place to ensure adolescents sail through these 8 years in a healthy way. Eight years of intense hormonal activity is a very long time, especially when proper guidelines are not in place. The consequence which has relevant significance to marriage is that this unregulated gap provides room for extensive experimentation with sexuality. And some of these experiments negatively impact the foundation of marriage. These sexual experiments, which range from masturbation to multi-level sexual release (don’t ask) seek to demystify the concept of sex, stripping it of all mystery and mystic, making it very cheap and retail. At the instance of marriage, sex becomes not a culmination with all the magic this is supposed to conjure, but just another experiment with another subject. And when the magic wand can no-longer produce magic, the wand is free to wander. And this eventually acts as a catalyst that speeds up the rate of collapse. While sexual experimentation is not unique to the 21st century or the modern world for that matter, the institution of a globally recognized legal age, and the imposition of this age as a threshold for marriage, is a very recent phenomenon.

The primary objective of marriage is raising a family. That the state has to get involved and ensure the “permanent” binding of two people, is so that such binding can provide a safe environment for children and a means through which these children can be indoctrinated into the ways of society. These conditions imposed can only be understood and tolerated in the light of the many dependencies that will rely on the stability of the union. But if we remove the issue of procreation from the equation, then the structure of marriage becomes a meaningless institution for bondage and suffering. And this, not many people can take. We live in an era where procreation is not top in the priority list of many people. Some want to advance their careers, some feel “later” is a more appropriate time and some just hate the idea of having kids. And since marriage, and all the conditions and limitations imposed are there for the benefits of children, when it dawns on the couple that they can live without children, it equally dawns on them (mostly with indescribable relief) that they don’t have to put up with all the restrictions that a marriage life imposes on them. And this revelation acts as a catalyst for the dissolution of marriage.

Again, I have cited this issue since it can be said to be a creation of the modern world. Before the world wars of the 20th century, the role of women in society was pretty much universal and restricted to procreation and the nurturing of a family. But today, women have to work. In cases where they still opt for a family, the nurturing role is outsourced. But in some extreme cases, the number of which keeps rising astronomically, the idea of procreation is shelved altogether, and with it, the whole business of marriage.

The above is but a brief and simple analysis of one of the most crucial problems of the 21st century. The nature of the question restricted me to only reveal the nature of the problem. As to what I think a possible solution might be, is beyond the scope of the present entry. I would highly recommend a deeper analysis and discussion on the topic, as the problem concerns the institution of family, which is the central constituent of a society. Without a family, we don’t have a society. And without a society, well let’s leave that for another day.

Thank you for your time.

With Love,
Grand Philosopher.

You can send your queries to the Grand Philosopher through the emails [grand_philosopher@hyblog.info](mailto:grand_philosopher@hyblog.info) or [info@hyreads.com](mailto:info@hyreads.com).<br>

To engage is to educate; to educate is to enlighten; to enlighten is to empower. Let’s engage for a better world and Just Society. You can also get in touch via twitter **[@GrandPhilosospher](https://twitter.com/GranPhilosopher)**
